CENTERS FOR MEDICARE & MEDICAID SERVICES




  Your Guide to Choosing a Nursing Home
  or Other Long‑Term Services & Supports


  This official government booklet explains:
  ■■ How to find and compare nursing homes
     and other long-term services and supports
  ■■ How to pay for nursing home care
  ■■ Your rights as a nursing home resident
  ■■ Alternatives to nursing home care


  Use the checklist on pages 31-39 to compare nursing homes.
“Your Guide to Choosing a Nursing Home or Other Long-Term Services & Supports” isn’t a
legal document. Official Medicare Program legal guidance is contained in the relevant statutes,
regulations, and rulings.
The information in this booklet describes the Medicare Program at the time this booklet was
printed. Changes may occur after printing. Visit Medicare.gov, or call 1-800-MEDICARE
(1-800-633-4227) to get the most current information. TTY users can call 1-877-486-2048.
                   Paid for by the Department of Health & Human Services.
Table of contents
Section 1: Getting started  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   What’s nursing home care? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   What’s long-term care? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   If you have Medicare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   If you have Medicaid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
Section 2: How do I choose a nursing home? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Step 1:		 Find nursing homes in your area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Step 2: Compare the quality of the nursing homes
   		 you’re considering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Step 3:		 Visit the nursing homes you’re interested in . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Step 4: Choose the nursing home that meets your needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Next steps: After you’ve chosen a nursing home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Once you’re a resident . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
Section 3: What are my other long-term care options?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   Community-based services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   Residential care options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
Section 4: Paying for nursing home & other long-term care  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   Medicare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   Prescription drug coverage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   Medicaid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   Long-term care insurance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   Personal resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
Section 5: Where can I get help? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
   Administration for Community Living (ACL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
   Beneficiary and Family Centered Care Quality Improvement
   Organizations (BFCC-QIOs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
   Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   State Health Insurance Assistance Programs (SHIPs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   State Survey Agencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
Section 6: Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Nursing home checklist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31




                                                                                                                                    3
4
                   Section 1:
          Getting started
                                                                         1
People go to nursing homes for different reasons, including if they’re sick,
hurt, had surgery and need to get better, or have chronic care needs or
disabilities that require on going nursing care. “Your Guide to Choosing
a Nursing Home or Other Long-Term Services & Supports” can help
you make informed decisions about nursing home care, whether you’re
planning ahead or need to make an unexpected decision.

What’s nursing home care?
Some nursing home care is custodial care, like help with bathing or
dressing. Other nursing home care includes skilled care (like changing
sterile bandages).

What’s long-term care?
Long-term care includes medical and non-medical care provided to
people who are unable to perform basic activities of daily living, like
dressing or bathing. Long-term supports and services can be provided at
home, or in the community, assisted living, or nursing homes.
Before you choose a nursing home, check to see if there are other options
available, or if they might help after a nursing home stay. You may have
other long-term care options, like community services, home care,
or assisted living, depending on your needs and resources. For more
information on your long-term care options, see Section 4 (page 21).

If you have Medicare
Medicare Part A (Hospital Insurance) may cover:
■■Care in a certified skilled nursing facility (SNF) if it’s medically
  necessary for you to have skilled care.
■■Short-term nursing stays following hospitalization.
■■Limited home- and-community-based long term care.
Part A doesn’t cover:
■■Custodial care if that’s the only care you need.
■■Long term care or stays in a nursing home.


                                                                               5
1   Getting started


         If you have Medicaid
         Medicaid may cover long-term nursing home stays, and home- and
         community-based services. Home- and community-based services
         provide opportunities for people with Medicaid to get services in their
         own homes or community based. These programs serve a variety
         of groups, including people with mental illnesses, intellectual or
         developmental disabilities, and/or physical disabilities.




6
                     Section 2:
How do I choose a nursing home?
                                                                         2
   Follow these 4 steps to find a nursing home that best meets your needs:
     Step 1: Find nursing homes in your area.
     Step 2: Compare the quality of the nursing homes you’re considering
     Step 3: Visit the nursing homes you’re interested in, or have someone
             visit for you.
     Step 4: Choose the nursing home that best meets your needs.

   Step 1: Find nursing homes in your area.
   There are many ways you can learn about nursing homes in your area:
   ■■Ask people you trust, like your family, friends, or neighbors.
   ■■Ask your doctor if he or she provides care at any local nursing homes.
     You may be able to get care from him or her while you’re in the nursing
     home.
   ■■Visit Medicare.gov/nursinghomecompare.
   ■■Use the Eldercare Locator or an Aging and Disability Resource Center
     (ADRC). See page 25.
   ■■Contact your local senior and community activity center.
   ■■If you’re in the hospital, ask your social worker about discharge planning
     as early in your hospital stay as possible. The hospital’s staff should be
     able to help you find a nursing home that meets your needs and help
     with your transfer when you’re ready to be discharged.

   Step 2: Compare the quality of the nursing homes
   you’re considering.
   Medicare’s Nursing Home Compare
   Visit Medicare.gov/nursinghomecompare to get information on the
   quality of every Medicare- and Medicaid-certified nursing home in the
   country. Consider the information you find on Nursing Home Compare
   carefully. Use it, along with the other information you gather, to help
   guide your decision.



                                                                                  7
2              How do I choose a nursing home?


                     Information on Nursing Home Compare isn’t an endorsement or
                     advertisement for any particular nursing home.

                     Use these resources to help you choose a nursing home:
                     ■■Call your Long-Term Care Ombudsman. See page 26.
                     ■■Call your state health department or state licensing agency. Look in the
                       blue pages in the phone book or on the internet. Ask if they have written
                       information on the quality of care given in local nursing homes. You can
                       also ask for a copy of the full survey or the last complaint investigation
                       report.
                     ■■Look at survey findings (CMS Form 2567) for the facility. They can be
                       found on Nursing Home Compare at Medicare.gov/nursinghomecompare
                       and in the nursing home.

                     Step 3: Visit the nursing homes you’re interested in,
                     or have someone you trust visit for you.
                     After you consider what’s important to you in a nursing home, visit the
                     nursing homes. It’s best to visit the nursing homes that interest you before
                     you make a final decision on which one meets your needs.

                     A visit gives you the chance to see the residents, staff, and the nursing
                     home setting. It also allows you to ask questions of the nursing home staff
                     and talk with residents and their family members.

                     If you can’t visit the nursing home yourself, ask a family member or friend
                     to visit for you. You can also call for information, but a visit can help you
                     see the quality of care and life of the actual residents. For a checklist of
                     things to look for when you visit a nursing home, see page 31.

                     Important things to know when visiting nursing homes
                     ■■Before you go, call and make an appointment to meet with someone
    Words in blue      on the staff. You’re also encouraged to visit the nursing homes at other
    are defined on     times without an appointment.
    pages 29–30.
                     ■■Don’t be afraid to ask questions.
                     ■■Ask the staff to explain anything you see and hear that you don’t
                       understand.
8
                             How do I choose a nursing home?


■■Ask who to call if you have more questions, and write down their name
                                                                          2
  and phone number.
■■If a resident or a resident’s family wishes, you may talk to them about
  the care offered at the facility and their experience.
■■Don’t go into resident rooms or care areas without asking the resident
  and nursing home staff first. Always knock first and ask a resident before
  entering their room. Residents have a right to privacy and can refuse to
  allow you to come into their rooms.
■■After your visit, write down any questions you still have about the
  nursing home or how the nursing home will meet your needs.
Here are some general things to consider when you visit a nursing
home:
■■How does the nursing home help you to participate in social,
  recreational, religious, or cultural activities that are important to you?
■■Is transportation provided to community activities?
■■What kind of private spaces does the nursing home offer for when you
  have visitors?
■■Who are the doctors that will care for you? Can you still see your
  personal doctors? If your personal doctors don’t visit the nursing home,
  who will help you arrange transportation if you choose to continue to
  see them?
■■What does the quality of care and staffing information on Nursing
  Home Compare at Medicare.gov/nursinghomecompare show about how
  well this nursing home cares for its residents?
■■Will the same nursing home staff take care of you day-to-day, or do they
  change?
■■How many residents is a Certified Nursing Assistant (CNA) assigned to
  work with during each shift (day and night) and during meals?
■■What type of therapy is available at this facility? Are therapy staff
  available?
■■What types of meals does the nursing home serve?
  Note: Ask the nursing home if you can see a menu.


                                                                               9
2    How do I choose a nursing home?


         ■■How will the nursing home make sure that your dietary needs are met?
         ■■Does the nursing home make sure residents get preventive care to help
           keep them healthy? Are specialists like eye doctors, ear doctors, dentists,
           and podiatrists (foot doctors) available to see residents on a regular
           basis? Does the facility help make arrangements to see these specialists?
              Note: Nursing homes must either provide treatment or help you
              make appointments and arrange transportation for you to see
              specialists.
         ■■Does the nursing home have a screening program for vaccinations, like
           flu (influenza) and pneumonia?
              Note: Nursing homes are required to provide flu shots each year, but
              you have the right to refuse if you don’t want the shot, have already
              been immunized during the immunization period, or if the shots
              are medically contraindicated.
         ■■How will you get access to oral care in the nursing home?
         ■■How will you get access to mental health care in the nursing home?
         ■■Does the nursing home offer care for people with dementia? What care
           does it offer?
         ■■What’s the nursing home’s policy for the use of anti psychotic
           medication for people with dementia?

         Use the “Nursing home checklist” when you visit a nursing home
         Take a copy of the “Nursing home checklist” (pages 31-39) when you visit
         to help you evaluate the quality of a nursing home. Use a new checklist
         for each nursing home you visit. You can photocopy the checklist or print
         more copies at Medicare.gov/NursingHomeCompare/checklist.pdf.




10
                             How do I choose a nursing home?


Step 4: Choose the nursing home that meets your
                                                                        2
needs.
When you have all the information that’s important to you about the
nursing homes you’re considering, talk with people who understand your
personal and health care needs. This can include your family, friends,
doctor, clergy, spiritual advisor, hospital discharge planner, or social
worker.

What if more than one nursing home meets my needs?
If you find more than one nursing home you like with a bed available,
use the information you gathered to compare them. If you don’t like what
you saw on a visit (for example, if the facility wasn’t clean or you weren’t
comfortable talking with the nursing home staff), you may want to choose
another nursing home. If you felt that the residents were treated well, the
facility was clean, and the staff was helpful, you might feel better about
choosing that nursing home.

What if I’m helping someone make a decision?
If you’re helping someone, keep the person you’re helping involved in the
decision making process as much as possible. People who are involved
from the beginning are better prepared when they move into a nursing
home. If the person you’re helping isn’t alert or able to communicate well,
keep his or her values and preferences in mind.

What if I don’t like a nursing home I visit?
If you visit a nursing home that you don’t like, look at other options, if
available. Your happiness and the quality of your care is important.

What if I’m in the hospital and don’t like the nursing home that has
an available bed?
If you’re in a hospital and decide not to go to a certain nursing home
that has an available bed, talk to the hospital discharge planner or your
doctor. They may be able to help you find a more suitable nursing home
or arrange for other care, like short-term home health care, until a bed is
available at another nursing home you choose. But you may be responsible
for paying the bill for any additional days you stay in the hospital.

                                                                               11
2    How do I choose a nursing home?


         Next steps: After you’ve chosen a nursing home
         After you choose a nursing home, you’ll need to make arrangements to
         be admitted. Have this information ready when you contact the nursing
         home:

         Information for the nursing home office staff
         ■■Insurance information: Provide information about any health coverage
           and long-term care insurance you have that pays for nursing home care,
           health care, or both. This includes the name of the insurance company
           and the policy number.

           Note: If Medicare or Medicaid will cover your nursing home care, the
           nursing home can’t require you to pay a cash deposit. They may ask that
           you pay your Medicare coinsurance and other charges you would normally
           have to pay. The nursing home can’t require you to pay more than the
           rates allowed by Medicare or Medicaid for covered services. There
           may be charges for items or services that Medicare or Medicaid don’t
           cover, but the nursing home can’t require that you accept services that
           Medicare or Medicaid don’t cover as a condition of your continued stay.

           It’s best to pay charges once they’re billed to you – not in advance. You
           may have to pay a cash deposit before you’re admitted to a nursing home,
           if your care won’t be covered by either Medicare or Medicaid, and the
           nursing home isn’t limited to the rates allowed by Medicare or Medicaid.

         Information for the nursing home medical staff
         ■■Your medical history: Your doctor may give the staff some of this
           information. This includes a list of past health problems, any past
           surgeries or treatments, any shots you’ve had, and allergies you may have
           to food or medicine.
         ■■Your current health status: Your doctor should give the staff this
           information, including a list of your current health problems, recent
           diagnostic test results, and information about any activities of daily
           living that might be difficult for you to do by yourself.
         ■■Your current medications: Include the dose, how often you take it, and
           when and why you take it.

12
                            How do I choose a nursing home?          2
■■Your health care providers: Include their names, addresses, and phone
  numbers.
■■Your family members to call in case of an emergency: Include their
  names, addresses, and phone numbers.
Other important information to have ready
Health care advance directives
You may be asked if you have a health care advance directive, which is a
written legal document that says how you want medical decisions to be
made if you become unable to make decisions for yourself. There are 2
common types of health care advance directives:

■■A living will: A written legal document that shows what type of
  treatments you want or don’t want in case you can’t speak for yourself,
  like whether you want life support. Usually, this document only comes
  into effect if you’re unconscious.
■■A durable power of attorney for health care: A legal document that
  names someone else to make health care decisions for you. This is
  helpful if you become unable to make your own decisions.

If you don’t have a health care advance directive and need help preparing
one, or you need more information, talk to a social worker, discharge
planner, your doctor, or the nursing home staff. You can use the Eldercare
Locator to find out if your state has any legal services that can help you
prepare these forms. See page 25.

Once you’re a resident
Information the nursing home must give you
Once you choose a nursing home, they must give you information about
how to apply for and use Medicare and Medicaid benefits in a language
and format you understand. They must also give you information on how
to get refunds for previous payments you may have made that are covered
by these benefits.




                                                                             13
2    How do I choose a nursing home?


         Personal needs accounts
         You may want to open an account managed by the nursing home, although
         the nursing home can’t require this. You can deposit money into the
         account for personal use. Check with the nursing home to find out what
         expenses you can use the account for and how they manage the accounts.
         Your assessment & care plan
         Once you’ve selected a nursing home and are a resident, the nursing home
         staff will get your health information and review your health condition
         to prepare your care plan. You (if you’re able), your family (with your
         permission), or someone acting on your behalf has the right to take part
         in planning your care with the nursing home staff.
         Your assessment begins on the day you’re admitted and must be
         completed within 14 days. Staff will gather information about how well
         you function, your care needs, and your general well-being. The nursing
         home staff will review your assessment at least every 90 days, and possibly
         more often if your medical status changes.
         Once your assessment is complete, the nursing home staff will develop
         your care plan. Your care plan is a strategy for how the staff will help you
         with everyday needs – both medical and non-medical.
         Depending on your needs, your care plan may include:
         ■■What kind of personal or health care services you need
         ■■What type of staff should give you these services
         ■■How often you need the services
         ■■What kind of equipment or supplies you need (like a wheelchair or
           feeding tube)
         ■■Activity preferences
         ■■Your food preferences and dietary needs
         ■■How your care plan will help you reach your goals
         ■■Information on whether you plan to return to the community and, if
           so, a plan to help you meet that goal. For more information, visit
           Medicare.gov/publications to download and view these products:
           ■■“Your Discharge Planning Checklist”
           ■■“Your Right to Get Information about Returning to the Community”
14
                               How do I choose a nursing home?


Your resident rights & protections
                                                                         2
As a resident in a Medicare- and/or Medicaid-certified nursing home,
you have certain rights and protections under federal and state law to
make sure you get the care and services you need. You have the right to be
informed, make your own decisions, and have your personal information
kept private.

The nursing home must communicate these rights to you in a format and
language you understand. They must also explain in writing your rights
and responsibilities while you’re in the nursing home. This must be done
before or at the time you’re admitted, as well as during your stay. You
must acknowledge in writing that you got this information.

Here’s a list of some of your rights:
■■Be free from discrimination.
■■Be free from abuse and neglect.
■■Exercise your rights as a U.S. citizen.
■■Have your representative notified about your care.
■■Get proper medical care.
■■Be treated with respect.
■■Be free from restraints.
■■Have protections against involuntary transfer or discharge.
■■Participate in activities.
■■Spend time with visitors.
■■Form or participate in resident groups.
■■Manage your money.
■■Get information on services and fees.
■■Get proper privacy, property, and living arrangements.
■■Make complaints.
For a full list of your resident rights and protections, visit Medicare.gov.




                                                                               15
2    How do I choose a nursing home?


         Reporting & resolving problems
         If you have a problem at the nursing home, talk to the staff involved.
         For example, if you have a problem with your care, talk to the nurse
         or Certified Nurse Assistant (CNA). The staff may not know there’s a
         problem unless you tell them. If the problem isn’t resolved, ask to talk
         with the supervisor, social worker, director of nursing, administrator, or
         your doctor.
         If your problem continues, follow the facility’s grievance procedure for
         complaints. The Medicare- and/or Medicaid-certified nursing home must
         have a grievance procedure. You may also want to bring the problem to
         the resident or family group.
         A Medicare- and/or Medicaid-certified nursing home must post the
         name, address, and phone number of groups that may be helpful to you,
         like the State Survey Agency, State Licensure Office, State Long-Term
         Care Ombudsman Program, Protection and Advocacy Agency, and
         the Medicaid Fraud Control Unit. If you feel you need outside help to
         resolve your problem, call the Long-Term Care Ombudsman, State Survey
         Agency, or the Protection and Advocacy Agency for your area.
         To get the contact information for these resources in your state, visit
         Medicare.gov/contacts or call 1-800-MEDICARE (1-800-633-4227).
         TTY users can call 1-877-486-2048.

         What if I don’t like a nursing home I’m currently in?
         If you don’t like the nursing home you’re currently living in, you can
         move to another facility with an available bed. Moving can be difficult,
         but an extra move may be better for you than choosing to stay at a facility
         that isn’t right for you.
         The nursing home you leave may require that you let them know ahead of
         time that you’re planning to leave. Talk to the nursing home staff about
         their rules for leaving. If you don’t follow the rules for leaving, you may
         have to pay extra fees.
         If you want information about living in the community, nursing homes
         are required to reach out to a local agency that can give you more
         information. Talk to the nursing home social worker about your plan to
         transition to the community.
16
                             Section 3:
What are my other long-term care options?

        You may have other long-term care options (besides nursing home care)
                                                                                3
        available to you. Talk to your family, your doctor or other health care
        provider, a person-centered counselor, or a social worker for help deciding
        what kind of long-term care you need.
        If you’re in a hospital, nursing home, or working with a home health
        agency, you can get support to help you understand your options or help
        you arrange care. Talk to:
        ■■A discharge planner.
        ■■A social worker.
        ■■An organization in a “No Wrong Door System,” like an Aging and
          Disability Resource Center (ADRC), Area Agency on Aging (AAA), or
          Center for Independent Living (CIL). See page 25.
        For general information on long-term care, visit longtermcare.acl.gov. See
        Section 5 (page 25) for a list of resources to help you get more information.
        American Indians and Alaska Natives can contact their local Indian
        health care providers for more information.
        You can consider both community and residential long-term care
        options.

        Community-based services
        There are many long-term care options that may be available in your
        community, including:
         Home- and community-based services: A variety of home- and
         community-based services may be available to help with your personal
         care and activities.
         Medicaid may cover some services, including:
         • Home care (like cooking, cleaning, or help with other daily activities)
         • Home health services (like physical therapy or skilled nursing care)
         • Transportation to medical care
         • Personal care
         • Respite care
         • Hospice
         • Case management
                                                                                        17
3           What are my other long-term care options?


                  Medicaid programs vary from state to state. Medicaid may offer
                  more services in your state. To get the phone number for your State
                  Medical Assistance (Medicaid) Office, visit Medicare.gov/contacts
                  or call 1-800-MEDICARE (1-800-633-4227). TTY users can call
                  1-877-486-2048.
                  These types of services may also be available through other programs,
                  like the Area Agency on Aging, Medicare, or hospice programs. For
                  more information about Medicare’s coverage of hospice and home
                  health services, visit Medicare.gov.
                  Community sources, like volunteer groups that help with things like
                  shopping or transportation, which may be free or low cost (or may ask
                  for a voluntary donation), are another option. Here are some examples
                  of the services and programs that may be available in your community:
                  ■■Adult day services
                  ■■Adult day health care (which offers nursing and therapy)
                  ■■Care coordination and case management (including transition services
                    to leave a nursing home)
                  ■■Home care (like cooking, cleaning, or help with other daily activities)
                  ■■Meal programs
                  ■■Senior centers
                  ■■Friendly visitor programs
                  ■■Help with shopping and transportation
                  ■■Help with legal questions, bill pay, and other financial matters
                  Programs of All inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE): PACE is a type
                  of Medicare and Medicaid Program offered in many states. PACE helps
                  people who would otherwise need nursing home-level of care to stay in
                  their community.
                  To qualify for PACE, you must meet these conditions:
 Words in blue
 are defined on   ■■You’re 55 or older.
 pages 29–30.     ■■You live in the service area of a PACE organization.
                  ■■Your state certifies that you need a nursing home-level of care.
                  ■■At the time you join, you’re able to live safely in the community with
                    the help of PACE services.
18
                 What are my other long-term care options?


Residential care options
                                                                      3
There are many long-term care options that may be available in a
residential setting, including:

 Accessory dwelling units (ADUs): An ADU (sometimes called an
 “in-law apartment,” “accessory apartment,” “or a “second unit”) is a
 second living space within a home or on a lot. It has a separate living
 and sleeping area, a place to cook, and a bathroom. If you or a loved one
 owns a single-family home, adding an ADU to an existing home may
 help you keep your independence.

 Existing space, like an upper floor, basement, attic, or over a garage, may
 be turned into an ADU. Family members may be interested in living
 in an ADU in your home, or you may want to move into an ADU at a
 family member’s home.

 Check with your local zoning office to be sure ADUs are allowed in your
 area, and find out if there are any special rules. The cost of an ADU can
 vary widely, depending on many factors, like the size of the project.

 Continuing Care Retirement Communities (CCRCs): Some retirement
 communities offer different kinds of housing and levels of care. In the
 same community, there may be individual homes or apartments (for
 residents who still live on their own), an assisted living facility (for
 people who need help with daily care), and a nursing home (for people
 who require higher levels of care).

 Residents can move from one level to another based on their individual
 needs, but usually stay within the CCRC. If you’re considering a CCRC,
 be sure to check the quality information and inspection report (posted
 in the facility) of its nursing home.




                                                                               19
3           What are my other long-term care options?


                  Group living arrangements: Residential care communities (sometimes
                  called “adult foster/family homes” or “personal care homes”) and
                  assisted living communities are types of group living arrangements. In
                  some states, residential care and assisted living communities mean the
                  same thing. Both can help with some of the activities of daily living, like
                  bathing, dressing, using the bathroom, and meals. Whether they offer
                  nursing services or help with medications varies by state.

                  In most cases, residents of these communities pay a regular monthly
                  rent and additional fees depending on the type of personal care services
                  they get.

                  Subsidized senior housing: There are state and federal programs that
                  help pay for housing for some seniors with low to moderate incomes.
                  Some of these housing programs also offer help with meals and other
                  activities, like housekeeping, shopping, and doing the laundry. Residents
                  usually live in their own apartments within an apartment building. Rent
                  payments are usually based on a percentage of a person’s income. For
                  more information, visit hud.gov/topics/information_for_senior_citizens.




 Words in blue
 are defined on
 pages 29–30.




20
                                                                      4
                  Section 4:
Paying for nursing home
 & other long-term care

Nursing home care can be expensive. There are many ways to pay for
your nursing home care. Most people who enter nursing homes begin by
paying for their care out-of-pocket. As you use your resources (like bank
accounts and stocks) over a period of time, you may eventually become
eligible for Medicaid.

Medicare
Medicare generally doesn’t cover long-term stays in a nursing home.
Even if Medicare doesn’t cover your nursing home care, you’ll still need
Medicare for hospital care, doctor services, and medical supplies while
you’re in the nursing home.
Medicare Part A (Hospital Insurance) covers skilled care provided in
a skilled nursing facility (SNF) under certain conditions for a limited
time. Skilled care is nursing and therapy care that can only be safely and
effectively performed by, or under the supervision of, professionals or
technical personnel. It’s health care given when you need skilled nursing
or skilled therapies to treat, manage, and observe your condition, and
evaluate your care. Medicare covers certain daily skilled care services
on a short-term basis (up to 100 days in a benefit period). For more
information on Medicare’s coverage of SNF care, visit Medicare.gov
or call 1-800-MEDICARE (1-800-633-4227). TTY users can call
1-877-486-2048.
There are 2 main ways to get your Medicare coverage:
1. Original Medicare: Medicare covers very limited and medically
   necessary skilled nursing care at a nursing home or in your home (with
   home health care) if you need short-term skilled care for an illness or
   injury and you meet certain conditions. But Original Medicare doesn’t
   pay for most nursing home care. For more information on Medicare
   coverage of skilled nursing facility (SNF) care or home health care,
   visit Medicare.gov or call 1-800-MEDICARE.
2. Medicare Advantage Plans and other Medicare health plans: If
   you’re in a Medicare Advantage Plan (like an HMO or PPO) or other
   Medicare health plan, check with your plan to learn their rules for
   covering nursing home care. Usually, plans don’t help pay for this care
   unless the nursing home has a contract with the plan. Ask your plan
   about nursing home coverage before you make any arrangements to
   enter a nursing home. If the nursing home has a contract with your
   plan, ask your plan if they check the home for quality of care.
                                                                             21
4           Paying for nursing home & other long-term care


                  Prescription drug coverage
                  If you live in a nursing home or other institution, you’ll get your covered
                  prescriptions from a long-term care pharmacy that works with your plan if:
                  ■■You have a Medicare Advantage Plan or other Medicare health plan.
                  ■■You have Medicare prescription drug coverage (Part D).
                  If you have Medicare & live in a nursing home or other institution, you
                  should know:
                  ■■If you move in or out of a nursing home or other institution, you can
                    switch Medicare drug plans at that time.
                  ■■You can switch Medicare drug plans at any time while you’re living in
                    the institution.
                  ■■If you aren’t able to join a drug plan on your own, your authorized
                    representative can enroll you in a plan that meets your needs.
                  ■■If you’re in a skilled nursing facility (SNF) and you’re getting
                    Medicare-covered care, your prescriptions generally will be covered by
                    Medicare Part A (Hospital Insurance).
                  For more information on Medicare prescription drug coverage, visit
                  Medicare.gov.

                  Medicaid
                  Medicaid is a joint federal and state program that helps with medical
                  costs for some people with limited income and resources. Most health
                  care costs are covered if you qualify for both Medicare and Medicaid.
                  Most, but not all, nursing homes accept Medicaid payment. Even if you
                  pay out-of-pocket or with long-term care insurance, you may eventually
                  “spend down” your assets while you’re at the nursing home, so it’s
                  important to know if the nursing home you choose accepts Medicaid.

 Words in blue
 are defined on
 pages 29–30.




22
             Paying for nursing home & other long-term care


Medicaid varies from state-to-state. Most often, whether or not you’re
                                                                          4
eligible for Medicaid is based on your income and personal resources.
Many states have higher Medicaid income limits for nursing home
residents. You may be eligible for Medicaid coverage in a nursing home
even if you haven’t qualified for other Medicaid services in the past.

To get more information on Medicaid eligibility in your state, call
your state Medicaid Program. To get the phone number for your State
Medical Assistance (Medicaid) Office, visit Medicare.gov/contacts or call
1-800-MEDICARE (1-800-633-4227). TTY users can call 1-877-486-2048.

Long-term care insurance
This type of insurance policy can help pay for many types of long-term
care, including both skilled and non-skilled care. Long-term care
insurance can vary widely. Some policies may cover only nursing home
care, while others may include coverage for a whole range of services,
like adult day care, assisted living, medical equipment, and informal
home care.

If you have long-term care insurance, check your policy or call the
insurance company to find out if the care you need is covered. If you’re
shopping for long-term care insurance, find out which types of long-term
care services and facilities the different policies cover. Also, check to see if
your coverage could be limited because of a pre-existing condition. Make
sure you buy your policy from a reliable company that’s licensed in your
state.

Personal resources
You can use your personal money and savings to pay for nursing home
care. Some insurance companies let you use your life insurance policy
to pay for long-term care. Contact your insurance provider for more
information on what your private insurance covers.




                                                                                   23
                  Section 5:
   Where can I get help?
                                                                        5
Administration for Community Living (ACL)
ACL is a federal agency that provides funding to support programs
in your community with the goal of maximizing the independence,
well-being, and health of older adults, people with disabilities, and their
families and caregivers. Visit acl.gov to learn more. Some of the services
the ACL offers include:

  Aging and Disability Resource Centers (ADRCs)
  ACL partners with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
  (CMS), the Veterans Health Administration, and other federal agencies
  to support every state’s development of “No Wrong Door Systems” that
  streamline access to long-term services and supports. ADRC’s are part
  of “No Wrong Door Systems.”

  Older adults, people with disabilities, caregivers, and families can use
  ADRCs to enter the long-term services and supports system. ADRCs
  help people and their families:
  ■■Identify their long-term services and support needs
  ■■Understand their options, including the publicly funded programs
    available to them
  ■■Develop and activate a long-term care plan
For information about ADRC’s in your area call the Eldercare Locator at
1-800-677-1116.

  Centers for Independent Living (CILs)
  CILs help people with disabilities find community living options
  and develop independent living skills. Visit ilru.org/home, or call
  1-713-520-0232 for contact information of local services.

  Eldercare Locator
  The Eldercare Locator helps older adults and their caregivers connect
  to services, including long-term care services and supports. Visit
  eldercare.gov, or call 1-800-677-1116.


                                                                              25
5    Where can I get help?


            Long-Term Care Ombudsman
            The Long-Term Care Ombudsman advocates for residents of nursing
            homes, board and care homes, assisted living facilities, and other adult
            care facilities. They work to resolve residents’ problems and to bring
            about changes at the local, state, and national levels that will improve
            residents’ care and quality of life. These duties include:
            ■■Visiting nursing homes and speaking with residents throughout the
              year to make sure residents’ rights are protected
            ■■Working with you to solve problems with your nursing home care,
              including financial issues
            ■■Discussing general information with you about nursing homes,
              resident’s rights, and care
            ■■Answering questions, like how many complaints they’ve gotten about
              a specific nursing home, what kind of complaints they were, and if the
              issues were resolved in a timely manner
            The ACL supports the National Ombudsman Resource Center, which
            has contact information for each States’ Long-Term Care Ombudsman.
            To get the contact information for your local ombudsman program
            office, use the Eldercare Locator at eldercare.gov or visit
            ltcombudsman.org.

          Beneficiary and Family Centered Care Quality
          Improvement Organizations (BFCC-QIOs)
          A BFCC-QIO is an organization that uses practicing doctors and other
          health care experts to check and improve the care given to people with
          Medicare. Your BFCC-QIO can help if you have questions or complaints
          about the quality of your care for a Medicare-covered service or if you
          think Medicare coverage for your service is ending too soon. Visit
          Medicare.gov/contacts, or call 1-800-MEDICARE (1-800-633-4227) to get
          the phone number for the BFCC-QIO in your state. TTY users can call
          1-877-486-2048.




26
                                          Where can I get help?


Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
                                                                        5
CMS is an agency in the federal government that can give you more
information about Medicare and Medicaid coverage, home- and
community-based services, and other health-related topics. Visit
Medicare.gov, or call 1-800-MEDICARE (1-800-633-4227). TTY users
can call 1-877-486-2048.

 Nursing Home Compare
 Medicare’s Nursing Home Compare allows you to find and compare
 information about nursing homes. Visit Medicare.gov/nursinghomecompare
 for more information.

 Medicaid offices
 Medicaid offices are state agencies that are in charge of the state’s
 Medicaid Program. Your local Medicaid office can give you information
 about Medicaid eligibility and covered benefits, including coverage
 for institutional (nursing home) and home- and community-based
 long-term care services. You can also find this information on your
 state’s website. To get the phone number for your State Medical
 Assistance (Medicaid) Office, visit Medicare.gov/contacts or call
 1-800-MEDICARE.

State Health Insurance Assistance Programs (SHIPs)
SHIPs are state programs that get money from the federal government to
give free, local health insurance counseling. Visit shiptacenter.org or call
1-800-MEDICARE to get the phone number for the SHIP in your state.

State Survey Agencies
Your State Survey Agency can help you with questions or complaints
about the quality of care or the quality of life in a nursing home. State
Survey Agencies oversee nursing homes that participate in the Medicare
and/or Medicaid programs. State Survey Agencies inspect health care
facilities and investigate complaints to ensure health and safety standards
are met. To get the phone number for your State Survey Agency, visit
Medicare.gov/contacts.

                                                                               27
                  Section 6:
              Definitions

Coinsurance: An amount you may be required to pay as your share of
                                                                       6
the cost for services after you pay any deductibles. Coinsurance is usually
a percentage (for example, 20%).
Custodial care: Non-skilled personal care, like help with activities of daily
living like bathing, dressing, eating, getting in or out of a bed or chair,
moving around, and using the bathroom. It may also include the kind of
health-related care that most people do themselves, like using eye drops.
In most cases, Medicare doesn’t pay for custodial care.
Home health care: Health care services and supplies a doctor decides
you may receive in your home under a plan of care established by your
doctor. Medicare only covers home health care on a limited basis as
ordered by your doctor.
Hospice: A special way of caring for people who are terminally ill. Hospice
care involves a team-oriented approach that addresses the medical, physical,
social, emotional, and spiritual needs of the patient. Hospice also provides
support to the patient’s family or caregiver.
Medicare Advantage Plan (Part C): A type of Medicare health plan
offered by a private company that contracts with Medicare. Medicare
Advantage Plans provide all of your Part A and Part B benefits. Medicare
Advantage Plans include:
  • Health Maintenance Organizations
  • Preferred Provider Organizations
  • Private Fee-for-Service Plans
  • Special Needs Plans
  • Medicare Medical Savings Account Plans
If you’re enrolled in a Medicare Advantage Plan:
  • Most Medicare services are covered through the plan
  • Medicare services aren’t paid for by Original Medicare
  • Most Medicare Advantage Plans offer prescription drug coverage.




                                                                                29
6    Where can I get help?


          Medicare health plan: Generally, a plan offered by a private company
          that contracts with Medicare to provide Part A and Part B benefits to people
          with Medicare who enroll in the plan. Medicare health plans include all
          Medicare Advantage Plans, Medicare Cost Plans, and Demonstration/Pi-
          lot Programs. Programs of All-inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE)
          organizations are special types of Medicare health plans that can be offered
          by public or private entities and provide Part D and other benefits in
          addition to Part A and Part B benefits.
          Medicare Part A (Hospital Insurance): Part A covers inpatient hospital
          stays, care in a skilled nursing facility, hospice care, and some home
          health care.
          Medicare prescription drug coverage (Part D): Optional benefits for
          prescription drugs available to all people with Medicare for an additional
          charge. This coverage is offered by insurance companies and other private
          companies approved by Medicare.
          Original Medicare: Original Medicare is a fee-for-service health plan
          that has two parts: Part A (Hospital Insurance) and Part B (Medical
          Insurance). After you pay a deductible, Medicare pays its share of the
          Medicare-approved amount, and you pay your share (coinsurance
          and deductibles).
          Pre-existing condition: A health problem you had before the date that
          new health coverage starts.
          Skilled nursing facility (SNF): A nursing facility with the staff and
          equipment to give skilled nursing care and, in most cases, skilled
          rehabilitative services and other related health services.




30
                     Nursing home checklist

Name of nursing home: ____________________________________________________

Address: ________________________________________________________________

Phone number: __________________________________________________________

Date of visit: _____________________________________________________________



Basic information                                   Yes   No   Notes
Is the nursing home Medicare certified?
Is the nursing home Medicaid certified?
   Note: “Certified” means the nursing home
   passed an inspection conducted by a state
   government agency. Medicare only covers
   care from nursing homes that are certified.
Are the nursing home and current
administrator licensed in my state?
Does the nursing home have a bed available?
Does the nursing home offer specialized
services, like a special care unit for a resident
with dementia or ventilator care?
Is the nursing home located close enough for
friends and family to visit?
Are there resident policies I must follow?
Will I get a written copy of these policies?
Are there extra charges for other services,
like beauty shop services?




                          Visit Medicare.gov for more information.
                                                                               31
             Nursing home checklist

     Basic information                                 Yes   No   Notes
     Will the nursing home tell me in writing about
     their services, charges, and fees before I move
     into the home?
        Note: Medicare- and/or Medicaid-
        certified nursing homes must tell you this
        information in writing. Get a copy of the
        fee schedule to find out which services
        are available, which are included in your
        monthly fee, and which services cost extra.
        Then, compare nursing home costs.


     Safety & care                                     Yes   No   Notes
     Have you checked the nursing home’s
     star ratings on Medicare.gov?
     Is the nursing home taking action to improve
     quality or staffing as needed?
     Can residents still see their personal doctors?
     If needed, does the facility help arrange
     transportation for this purpose?
     Does the nursing home have an arrangement
     with a nearby hospital?
     Are care plan meetings held with residents and
     family members at times that are convenient
     and flexible whenever possible?




                              Visit Medicare.gov for more information.
32
                                            Nursing home checklist

Safety & care                                      Yes   No   Notes
Does the nursing home’s inspection report
show quality of care problems or other
citations (failure to meet one or more state
or federal requirements)?
   Note: The nursing home must have the
   report of the most recent state or federal
   survey of the facility available for you to
   look at. These reports tell you how well the
   nursing home meets federal health and
   safety regulations. Reports can also be
   found on most state survey agency websites
   and Medicare.gov.
Has the nursing home corrected all citations
on its last state inspection report?


Preventing abuse                                   Yes   No   Notes
Does the relationship between staff and
residents appear to be warm, polite, and
respectful?
Does the nursing home check to make sure
they don’t hire staff members with a finding
or history of abuse, neglect or mistreatment of
residents in the state nurse aid registry?
Does the nursing home have policies and
procedures on prohibiting and reporting
abuse and neglect?
Is the nursing home taking action to
keep residents safe from abuse, neglect,
mistreatment, or exploitation?
Is there information about how to report
concerns about the care and safety of residents?
                        Visit Medicare.gov for more information.
                                                                      33
            Nursing home checklist

     Preventing abuse                                 Yes    No   Notes
     Is there information about how the facility
     responds to concerns that are reported?
     Has the nursing home been cited for issues
     related to abuse in the last year or two?
        Note: Nursing homes cited for abuse will
        have the following icon next to their name
        on Medicare.gov:


     Nursing home appearance                          Yes    No   Notes
     Are residents clean, well groomed, and
     appropriately dressed for the season or
     time of day?
     Is the nursing home free from overwhelming
     unpleasant odors?
     Does the nursing home appear clean and
     well kept?
     Is the temperature in the nursing home
     comfortable for residents?
     Does the nursing home have good lighting?
     Are the noise levels in the dining room and
     other common areas comfortable?


     Nursing home living spaces                       Yes    No   Notes
     Is the furniture sturdy, yet comfortable
     and attractive?
     Are exits clearly marked?
     Are there quiet areas where residents can
     visit with friends and family?

                              Visit Medicare.gov for more information.
34
                                              Nursing home checklist

Nursing home living spaces                        Yes   No    Notes
Does the nursing home have smoke detectors
and sprinklers?
Are all common areas, resident rooms, and
doorways designed for wheelchairs?
Are handrails and grab bars appropriately
placed in the hallways and bathrooms?


Menus & food                                      Yes   No    Notes
Do residents have a choice of food items at
each meal? Do they serve foods you like?
Can the nursing home provide for special
dietary needs (like low-salt or no-sugar-
added diets)?
Are nutritious snacks available?
Does the staff help residents eat and drink
at mealtimes, if needed?


Staff                                             Yes   No    Notes
Do staff knock on the door before entering a
resident’s room?
Do staff refer to residents by name?
Does the nursing home offer a training and
continuing education program for all staff?
Is there licensed nursing staff 24 hours a day,
including a Registered Nurse (RN) present at
least 8 hours per day, 7 days a week?
Do Certified Nurse Aides (CNAs) help plan
the care of residents?

                         Visit Medicare.gov for more information.
                                                                       35
             Nursing home checklist

     Staff                                              Yes   No   Notes
     How many nurses, including CNAs, will be
     available to help me during the day, at night,
     and on weekends?
       Note: The nursing home is required to
       post this information.
     Is there a person on staff assigned to meet
     my social service needs, and can I meet
     with him or her?
     Will staff call my doctor for me if I have a
     medical need?
     Has there been a turnover in administrative
     staff, like the administrator or director of
     nursing, in the past year?
     Is my primary language spoken by staff? If not,
     is an interpreter available or another system in
     place to help me communicate my needs?


     Residents’ rooms                                   Yes   No   Notes
     Can residents have personal belongings
     and furniture in their rooms?
     Does each resident have storage space
     (closet and drawers) in their room?
     Does each resident have a window in
     their bedroom?
     Do residents have access to internet, a
     computer, a personal phone, and television?
     Do residents have a choice of roommates?
     Are there policies and procedures to protect
     residents’ possessions, including lockable
     cabinets and closets?
                               Visit Medicare.gov for more information.
36
                                               Nursing home checklist

Activities                                         Yes   No    Notes
Can residents, including those who are unable
to leave their rooms, choose to take part in a
variety of activities?
Do residents help plan or choose the activities
that are available?
Does the nursing home have outdoor areas
for resident use?
Is staff available to help residents go outside?
Does the nursing home have an active
volunteer program?
Do I get to choose what time to get up,
go to sleep, or bathe?
Can I have visitors at any time – even early
or late hours?
Would I be able to leave the facility for a few
hours or days if I choose to do so? Are there
procedures for leaving?
Does the nursing home offer the religious
or cultural support I need? If not, what type
of arrangements will they provide to meet
my needs?




                          Visit Medicare.gov for more information.
                                                                        37
            Nursing home checklist

     Caring for residents with dementia                Yes   No   Notes
     Does the nursing home have specific policies
     and procedures related to the care of residents
     with dementia?
     If so, does the policy include the use of non-
     medication based approaches to care as a first
     attempt to respond to behavioral symptoms
     (which are often a means of communication)
     for residents living with dementia?
     What percentage of residents who have a
     diagnosis of dementia are currently being
     prescribed an antipsychotic medication?
     What’s the nursing home’s current rate
     of antipsychotic medication use?
     Does the nursing home participate in any
     efforts related to reducing antipsychotic
     medication use in nursing homes (like
     the National Partnership to Improve
     Dementia Care)?




                              Visit Medicare.gov for more information.
38
                                Nursing home checklist

Go to a resident or family group meeting
While you’re visiting the nursing home, we recommend that you ask
if you can attend a resident or family group meeting. These groups
are usually organized and managed by the residents or the residents’
families to address concerns and improve the quality of care and life
for the resident.

If you’re able to go to a meeting, ask a group member these questions:
■■What improvements were made to the quality of life for residents in
  the last year?
■■What are the plans for future improvements?
■■How has the nursing home responded to recommendations for
  improvement?
■■Who does the group report to?
■■How does membership in the group work?
■■Who sets the agendas for meetings?
■■How are decisions made (for example, by voting, consensus, or
  one person makes them)?

Visit again
It’s a good idea to visit the nursing home a second time. It’s best to visit
a nursing home on a different day of the week and at a different time
than your initial visit. Staffing can be different at different times of the
day and on weekends.




           Visit Medicare.gov for more information.
                                                                               39
     Notice of Accessible Communications
     To help ensure people with disabilities have an equal opportunity to participate in
     our services, activities, programs, and other benefits, we provide communications in
     accessible formats. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) provides
     auxiliary aids and services to help us better communicate with people with disabilities.
     Auxiliary aids include materials in Braille, audio/data CD or other accessible formats.
     Note: You can get the “Medicare & You” handbook electronically in standard print,
           large print, or as an eBook.
     For general Medicare inquiries and Medicare publications, call us at 1-800-MEDICARE
     (1-800-633-4227). TTY: 1-877-486-2048.
     For all other CMS publications and documents in accessible formats, you can contact our
     Customer Accessibility Resource Staff:
     Call 1-844-ALT-FORM (1-844-258-3676). TTY: 1-844-716-3676.
        • Send a fax to 1-844-530-3676.
        • Send an email to altformatrequest@cms.hhs.gov.
        • Send a letter to::
          Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
          Offices of Hearings and Inquiries (OHI)
          7500 Security Boulevard, Mail Stop S1-13-25
          Baltimore, MD 21244-1850
          Attn: Customer Accessibility Resource Staff
     You can also contact the Customer Accessibility Resource staff:
        • To inquire about a request for accessible formats.
        • To submit concerns and issues about accessible communications, including the
          quality and timeliness of your request.
     Note: Your request for a CMS publication or document should include:
        • Your name, phone number, and the mailing address where we should send the
          publications or documents.
        • The publication title and CMS Product No., if known.
        • The format you need, like Braille, large print, or data/audio CD
     Note: If you’re enrolled in a Medicare Advantage or Prescription Drug Plan, you can
           contact your plan to request their documents in an accessible format.
40
Nondiscrimination Notice
CMS doesn’t exclude, deny benefits to, or otherwise discriminate against any
person on the basis of race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or age in admission
to, participation in, or receipt of the services and benefits under any of its programs
and activities, whether carried out by CMS directly or through a contractor or any
other entity with which CMS arranges to carry out its programs and activities.

How to file a complaint
If you believe you’ve been subjected to discrimination in a CMS program or
activity, there are 3 ways to file a complaint with the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Office for Civil Rights:
   1. Online at hhs.gov/civil-rights/filing-a-complaint/complaint-process/index.html.
   2. By phone: Call 1-800-368-1019. TDD user can call 1-800-537-7697.
   3. In writing: Send information about your complaint to:
     Office for Civil Rights
     U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
     200 Independence Avenue, SW
     Room 509F, HHH Building
     Washington, D.C. 20201




                                                                                            41
Notes

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________

_____________________________________________________________________________
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
AND HUMAN SERVICES

Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
7500 Security Boulevard
Baltimore, Maryland 21244-1850

Official Business
Penalty for Private Use, $300

CMS Product No. 02174
Revised October 2019




                                  This booklet is available in Spanish. To get your
                                  copy, call 1-800-MEDICARE (1-800-633-4227).
                                  TTY users can call 1-877-486-2048.

                                  Esta publicación está disponible en Español. Para
                                  obtener una copia, llame al 1-800‑MEDICARE
                                  (1‑800‑633‑4227). Los usuarios de TTY pueden
                                  llamar al 1‑877‑486‑2048.
