Panel to Review Risk and Prevalence of Elder Abuse and Neglect

       Richard J. Bonnie and Robert B. Wallace, Editors




               Committee on National Statistics

                             and

                Committee on Law and Justice

   Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education




             THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
                    Washington, D.C.
                    www.nap.edu
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS • 500 Fifth Street, N.W. • Washington, DC 20001

NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the
Governing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn
from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of
Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee respon-
sible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for
appropriate balance.

This study was supported by Contract/Grant No. N01-0D-4-2139 between the
National Academy of Sciences and DHHS/National Institutes of Health. Any opin-
ions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or
agencies that provided support for the project.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Bonnie, Richard J.
  Elder mistreatment : abuse, neglect, and exploitation in an aging
America / Richard J. Bonnie and Robert B. Wallace, Editors.
     p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 0-309-08434-2 (hardback)
 1. Aged—Abuse of—United States I. Wallace, Robert B. II. Title.
  HV6626.3+
  362.6—dc21
                                           2002012762

Additional copies of this report are available from The National Academies Press,
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242
or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://
www.nap.edu

Printed in the United States of America

Copyright 2003 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Suggested citation: National Research Council. (2003). Elder Mistreatment: Abuse,
Neglect, and Exploitation in an Aging America. Panel to Review Risk and Preva-
lence of Elder Abuse and Neglect. Richard J. Bonnie and Robert B. Wallace,
Editors. Committee on National Statistics and Committee on Law and Justice,
Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press.
The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society
of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated
to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.
Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Acad-
emy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and
technical matters. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of
Sciences.

The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of
the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engi-
neers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,
sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the
federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineer-
ing programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research,
and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is presi-
dent of the National Academy of Engineering.

The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the
examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute
acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its
congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own
initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V.
Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.

The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences
in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the
Academy’s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.
Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the
Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy
of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the
government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. The Coun-
cil is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr.
Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the
National Research Council.

                                                    www.national-academies.org
         PANEL TO REVIEW RISK AND PREVALANCE OF
                ELDER ABUSE AND NEGLECT
RICHARD J. BONNIE (Chair), Schools of Law and Medicine, University
   of Virginia
TERRY FULMER, School of Nursing, New York University
RICHARD A. KULKA, Research Triangle Institute, Research Triangle
   Park, NC
EVA KUTAS, Mental Health and Development Disabilities Service
   Division, National Association of Adult Protective Administrators,
   Salem, OR
EDWARD O. LAUMANN, Department of Sociology, University of
   Chicago
CONSTANTINE G. LYKETSOS, Division of Geriatric Psychiatry
   and Neuropsychiatry, School of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins
   University, MD
GARY B. MELTON, Institute on Family and Neighborhood Life,
   Clemson University, SC
LAURA MOSQUEDA, Department of Family Medicine, University of
   California, Irvine
GREGORY PAVEZA, School of Social Work, University of South
   Florida
KARL PILLEMER, Department of Human Development, Cornell
   University, NY
LORI A. STIEGEL, Commission on Legal Problems of the Elderly,
   American Bar Association, Washington, DC
ROBERT B. WALLACE, Department of Epidemiology and Internal
   Medicine, University of Iowa Colleges of Public Health and Medicine


EARL S. POLLACK, Study Director
MARISA GERSTEIN, Research Assistant
DANELLE DESSAINT, Senior Project Assistant
TANYA M. LEE, Project Assistant
LORA FLATTUM HAMP, Consultant




                                  v
            COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL STATISTICS
                       2001-2002
JOHN E. ROLPH (Chair), Marshall School of Business, University of
   Southern California
JOSEPH G. ALTONJI, Department of Economics, Northwestern
   University, IL
ROBERT BELL, AT&T Research Laboratories, Florham Park, NJ
LAWRENCE D. BROWN, Department of Statistics, University of
   Pennsylvania
ROBERT M. GROVES, Survey Research Center, University of Michigan
HERMAN HABERMANN, United Nations Statistical Division, New
   York, NY
JOEL L. HOROWITZ, Department of Economics, Northwestern
   University, IL
WILLIAM KALSBEEK, Survey Research Unit, Department of
   Biostatistics, University of North Carolina
ARLEEN LEIBOWITZ, School of Public Policy and Social Research,
   University of California, Los Angeles
RODERICK J.A. LITTLE, School of Public Health, University of
   Michigan
THOMAS A. LOUIS, The RAND Corporation, Arlington, VA
DARYL PREGIBON, AT&T Laboratories-Research, Florham, NJ
NORA CATE SCHAEFFER, Department of Sociology, University of
   Wisconsin-Madison
MATTHEW D. SHAPIRO, Department of Economics, University of
   Michigan


ANDREW A. WHITE, Director




                                vi
               COMMITTEE ON LAW AND JUSTICE
                          2001
CHARLES F. WELLFORD (Chair), Center for Applied Policy Studies
   and Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice, University of
   Maryland
JOAN PETERSILIA (Vice Chair), School of Social Ecology, University of
   California, Irvine
ALFRED BLUMSTEIN, H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and
   Management, Carnegie Mellon University
JEANETTE COVINGTON, Department of Sociology, Rutgers University
RUTH DAVIS, The Pymatuning Group, Inc., Alexandria, VA
JEFFREY FAGAN, Schools of Law and Public Health, Columbia
   University
DARNELL HAWKINS, Department of African American Studies,
   University of Illinois at Chicago
PHILIP HEYMANN, Center for Criminal Justice, Harvard Law School
CANDACE KRUTTSCHNITT, Department of Sociology, University of
   Minnesota
MARK LIPSEY, Department of Psychology and Human Development,
   Vanderbilt University
COLIN LOFTIN, School of Criminal Justice, State University of New
   York at Albany
JOHN MONAHAN, School of Law, University of Virginia
DANIEL NAGIN, H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and
   Management, Carnegie Mellon University
PETER REUTER, Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice,
   University of Maryland
WESLEY SKOGAN, Department of Political Science and Institute for
   Policy Research, Northwestern University
KATE STITH, School of Law, Yale University
MICHAEL TONRY, Institute of Criminology, Cambridge University
CATHY SPATZ WIDOM, Department of Psychiatry, New Jersey
   Medical School


CAROL PETRIE, Director
RALPH PATTERSON, Senior Project Assistant




                                 vii
                     Acknowledgments




                      T    he Panel to Review Risk and Prevalence of Elder
Abuse and Neglect wishes to thank the many individuals who contributed
to the preparation to this report. The project was sponsored by the Na-
tional Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, with additional support from the Office of
Behavioral and Social Science Research and the Office of Research on
Women’s Health of the National Institutes of Health and the Agency for
Health Care Research and Quality. Sidney Stahl served as project officer
and was very helpful in orienting the panel to the major issues on elder
abuse and neglect that needed to be considered.
    The panel also expresses its appreciation to Laurence Branch, Duke
University; Larry Corder, Duke University; and Brian Kemp, University of
California, Irvine, who prepared background papers in addition to those
included in this volume. Thanks are also due to those who reviewed the
papers commissioned by the panel and provided many helpful comments—
Barbara Altman, National Center for Health Statistics; Jack Guralnik, Na-
tional Institute on Aging; Jane Tilly, Urban Institute; Jordan Kosberg, Uni-
versity of Alabama; Kenneth Minaker, Massachusetts General Hospital;
Carla VandeWeerd, University of South Florida; Richard Schulz, University
of Pittsburgh; and George Annas, Boston University.
    The panel also wishes to thank Marie-Therese Connolly, U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice; Patricia McFeeley, University of New Mexico; Joanne
Otto, Colorado Department of Human Services; and Patsy Klaus, U.S.


                                     ix
x                                                        ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Department of Justice, for their presentations of background information
to the panel.
      The panel is also grateful to the staff of the National Research Council
for its superb support throughout the course of the study. Study Director
Earl Pollack, ably assisted by Marisa Gerstein, Danelle Dessaint, and Tanya
Lee, helped the panel stay well-informed, on track, and on time. Constance
Citro, senior project officer, provided many helpful suggestions. Lora
Hamp, a third-year student at the University of Virginia Law School, pro-
vided valuable research assistance on elder mistreatment legislation and on
legal and ethical issues in elder mistreatment research.
      This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for
their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with proce-
dures approved by the Report Review Committee of the National Research
Council. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and
critical comments that will assist the institution in making the published
report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional
standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge.
The review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect
the integrity of the deliberative process.
      We thank the following individuals for their participation in the review
of this report: Ira Ralph Katz, Institute on Aging, University of Pennsylva-
nia; Jennifer M. Kinney, Department of Sociology, Gerontology, and An-
thropology, Miami University; Jill E. Korbin, Office of the Dean, College of
Arts and Sciences, Case Western Reserve University; Kenneth Minaker,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston; Becky Morgan, Stetson College
of Law; and Stephen Zarit, Gerontology Center, Pennsylvania State Univer-
sity.
      Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions
or recommendations; nor did they see the final draft of the report before its
release. The review of this report was overseen by Robert Butler, Interna-
tional Longevity Center-USA, Ltd., New York City. Appointed by the
National Research Council, he was responsible for making certain that an
independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with
institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully con-
sidered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with
the authoring committee and the institution.
                              Contents




Preface                                                      xiii

Executive Summary                                              1



                      PART I: PANEL REPORT
1   Introduction                                               9
2   Concepts, Definitions, and Guidelines for Measurement     34
3   A Theoretical Model of Elder Mistreatment                 60
4   The Occurrence of Elder Mistreatment                      71
5   Risk Factors for Elder Mistreatment                       88
6   Screening and Case Identification in Clinical Settings   104
7   Evaluating Interventions                                 121
8   Research Ethics                                          140
9   Moving Forward                                           150

References                                                   153

Appendices
A Elder Mistreatment Measures and Studies                    165
B Analysis of Elder Abuse and Neglect Definitions
    Under State Law                                          181
          Lora Flattum Hamp

                                 xi
xii                                                         CONTENTS

C     Elder Abuse and Neglect: History and Concepts             238
         Rosalie Wolf
D     Biographical Sketches                                     249


                    PART II: BACKGROUND PAPERS
10 Elder Mistreatment: Epidemiological Assessment
      Methodology                                               261
         Ron Acierno

11 Ethical and Policy Issues in Research on Elder Abuse
      and Neglect                                               303
         Rebecca Dresser

12 The Clinical and Medical Forensics of Elder Abuse
      and Neglect                                               339
         Carmel Bitondo Dyer, Marie-Therese Connolly, and
         Patricia McFeeley

13 Financial Abuse of the Elderly in Domestic Settings          382
      Thomas L. Hafemeister

14 Elder Abuse in Residential Long-Term Care Settings:
      What Is Known and What Information Is Needed?             446
         Catherine Hawes

15 Elder Abuse Intervention: Lessons from Child Abuse
      and Domestic Violence Initiatives                         501
         David A. Wolfe

Index                                                           527
                                Preface




                       R     eports of this kind typically begin by calling at-
tention to the magnitude and social cost of the problem being explored.
The fact that equivalent statements cannot be made with any confidence
about elder mistreatment is a telling indication of the need for the report, as
well as for an intensified program of research. No survey of the U.S.
population has ever been undertaken to provide a national estimate for the
occurrence of any form of elder mistreatment; the magnitude of the prob-
lem—among community-dwelling elders, as well as those residing in long-
term care facilities—is basically unknown. The best estimates, based on
figures extrapolated from local studies, suggest that the national prevalence
of elder mistreatment (including physical abuse, psychological abuse, and
neglect) is between 1 and 2 million.
     The occurrence and severity of elder mistreatment are likely to increase
markedly over the coming decades, as the population ages, caregiving re-
sponsibilities and relationships change, and increasing numbers of older
persons require long-term care.
     Although the magnitude of elder mistreatment is unknown, its social
and moral importance is self-evident. However, there is no solid under-
standing of the nature, causes, and consequences of elder mistreatment, the
effectiveness and cost of current interventions, or measures that could suc-
cessfully be taken to prevent it or to ameliorate its effects. The purpose of
this report is to help the nation remedy this deficiency.
     In Understanding Child Abuse and Neglect (1993) and Violence in
Families (1998), the National Research Council was able to map out a

                                     xiii
xiv                                                                  PREFACE

comprehensive blueprint for research in the adjacent domains of child mis-
treatment and intimate partner violence. However, so little is now known
about elder mistreatment that it would be premature to draw up a detailed
research agenda for this nascent field. Instead, this report is best seen as
laying the foundation for a much-needed scientific effort. The panel em-
phasizes the need to develop a better understanding of elder mistreatment
in its different forms, to develop better measures for it, and to undertake a
variety of population-based studies to ascertain prevalence and risk factors.
Several priorities for research are identified in relation to the determinants
of elder mistreatment, clinical screening and case identification, and pre-
ventive interventions.
     We are not the first to lament the poor state of knowledge about elder
mistreatment. In 1986, a consensus conference of leading researchers (in-
cluding two of our panel members) was convened at the University of New
Hampshire to point the way toward advancing knowledge. The conclu-
sions and recommendations reached at that conference are strikingly simi-
lar to those appearing in this report.
     One of the participants at the New Hampshire conference was Rosalie
Wolf, by all accounts one of the founding leaders of the elder mistreatment
field. The panel expressed its deep gratitude to Dr. Wolf for presenting her
views at our initial meeting, despite her poor health, and was devastated
when she passed away within weeks of her appearance at our meeting. We
are publishing the remarks that she delivered at that meeting as an appen-
dix to this report. Indeed, our report is in many ways a tribute to Dr.
Wolf’s heroic efforts over three decades to nurture the field of elder mis-
treatment research.
     Abuse and neglect of older individuals in society breaches a widely
embraced moral commitment to protect vulnerable people from harm and
to ensure their well-being and security. To carry out this commitment, one
cannot rely on good intentions alone. A substantial investment in scientific
research along the lines outlined in this report is imperative to enable
society to enhance its understanding of elder mistreatment and to mount an
effective response to it in the 21st century.

                                       Richard J. Bonnie, Chair
                                       Panel to Review Risk and Prevalence
                                       of Elder Abuse and Neglect
                    Executive Summary




                       E     lder mistreatment is a recognized social problem
of uncertain, though probably increasing, magnitude. According to the
best available estimates, between 1 and 2 million Americans age 65 or older
have been injured, exploited, or otherwise mistreated by someone on whom
they depended for care or protection. The frequency of occurrence of elder
mistreatment will undoubtedly increase over the next several decades, as
the population ages. Yet little is known about its characteristics, causes, or
consequences or about effective means of prevention. This report is in-
tended to point the way toward better understanding of the nature and
scope of the problem, a necessary condition for the development of in-
formed policies and programs.
     As defined in this report, “elder mistreatment” refers to (a) intentional
actions that cause harm or create a serious risk of harm (whether or not
harm is intended) to a vulnerable elder by a caregiver or other person who
stands in a trust relationship to the elder or (b) failure by a caregiver to
satisfy the elder’s basic needs or to protect the elder from harm. The term
“mistreatment” is meant to exclude cases of so-called self-neglect—failure
of an older person to satisfy his or her own basic needs and to protect
himself or herself from harm—and also cases involving victimization of
elders by strangers.
     While elder mistreatment has attracted sustained efforts from practitio-
ners and some interest from policy makers over the past two decades, it has
not received concomitant attention from researchers or from the agencies
that provide research funding. No major foundation has identified this
field as one of its priorities, and the federal investment has been modest at

                                      1
2                                                      ELDER MISTREATMENT

best. For example, fewer than 15 studies on elder mistreatment have been
funded by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) since 1990, and support
from other agencies has been even less substantial. As a result, elder mis-
treatment research has thus far been confined to a small community of
investigators who have produced a modest body of knowledge concerning
the phenomenology, magnitude, etiology, and consequences of elder mis-
treatment. Estimates of mistreated elders have been based on sample sur-
veys in local areas and projected to the total U.S. population. Preventive
and remedial interventions have been unsystematic, episodic, and poorly
evaluated. In recognition of these deficiencies, the National Institute on
Aging requested the National Research Council, through the Committee on
National Statistics, to establish a panel of experts to assess the current state
of knowledge in the area of elder mistreatment and to formulate a set of
recommendations for a research agenda in that field.
    When the body of published and unpublished research reports on elder
mistreatment is examined as a whole, a number of weaknesses emerge:

    •   Unclear and inconsistent definitions
    •   Unclear and inadequate measures
    •   Incomplete professional accounts
    •   Lack of population-based data
    •   Lack of prospective data
    •   Lack of control groups
    •   Lack of systematic evaluation studies

    Among the factors accounting for these deficiencies are:

    •   Little funding and few investigators
    •   Methodological uncertainties, especially about surveys
    •   Ethical uncertainties regarding research practices
    •   Inadequate links between researchers and service agencies
    •   Impoverished theory
    •   Intertwined and varying research definitions and statutory defini-
        tions
    •   Divergent research traditions in gerontology and family violence

   In order the rectify these problems and to propel the field forward, the
panel recommends the following agenda for research.


                RECOMMENDED RESEARCH AGENDA
    Basic research on the phenomenology of elder mistreatment is a critical
early step in the further development of the field. Such research will lead to
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                            3

a much better understanding of the key elements of elder mistreatment,
which in turn will facilitate the development of broadly accepted opera-
tional definitions and the development of research and clinical measures for
these phenomena. Examples of such research include studies of: (1) the
kinds of trust relationships that older persons enter into, the other parties
involved in these relationships, the foundations of these relationships, and
their association with different types of mistreatment; (2) the different types
of harms that mistreated older persons may suffer, the interrelationship of
the different harms (e.g., relationship of physical to emotional to financial),
the severity of harms, their temporal characteristics, and their natural his-
tory; (3) the injurious conduct or omissions of other parties in trust rela-
tionships, how they manifest themselves, and their natural history; (4) the
psychological effects of mistreatment, including types of psychological
harm, their presentation, and their natural history; and (5) the circum-
stances under which harm is most likely to have been caused by the acts or
omissions of another person.
     Development of widely accepted operational definitions and validated
and standardized measurement methods for the elements of elder mistreat-
ment is urgently needed to move the field forward. The field must develop
widely accepted operational definitions of the elements of elder mistreat-
ment, its different forms, and associated risk factors and outcomes. The
field must also develop a series of measures for these elements, with good
(and known) reliability and validity. A menu of measures is necessary for
each of the multiple contexts of research, including screening and case
identification in clinical settings as well as studies of elder mistreatment in
populations.
     Population-based surveys of elder mistreatment occurrence are feasible
and should be given a high priority by funding agencies. Preparatory
funding should be provided to develop and test measures for identifying
elder mistreatment. There is inadequate information on elder mistreatment
occurrence among both community-dwelling and institutionalized elders.
However, before embarking on such surveys, the aims and rationale for
them should be clearly delineated, and the strengths and weaknesses of the
survey methodology fully understood. Different methods and approaches
may be required for various types of mistreatment, and multiple modes of
case ascertainment should be considered and evaluated. Survey-acquired
information could be enhanced by appropriately applied record linkage
techniques. Complementary study of biomarkers that may enhance elder
mistreatment case identification should be explored.
     Funding agencies should give priority to the design and fielding of
national prevalence and incidence studies of elder mistreatment. These
studies should include both a large-scale, independent study of prevalence
and modular add-ons to surveys of aging populations. Acquiring valid
4                                                      ELDER MISTREATMENT

national elder mistreatment occurrence rates is critically needed for im-
proved policy formulation. After appropriate methodological development,
a national survey of elder mistreatment occurrence and risk factors, de-
signed to inform important policy issues relevant to elder mistreatment
prevention and treatment, should be conducted.
      It is logistically feasible to add elder mistreatment case screening or
detection modules to existing, comprehensive geographic health and social
surveys, including longitudinal studies of aging populations, and attempts
should be made to further this application. Those surveys that have access
to frail, vulnerable elders and that contain study variables related to the risk
or outcomes of elder mistreatment are the ones most likely to be fruitful.
Such piggybacking of elder mistreatment items and instruments could also
serve as a test bed for developing methodology intended for national sur-
veys.
      In addition to improved household and geographically referent sam-
pling techniques, new methods of sampling and identifying elder mistreat-
ment victims in the community should be developed in order to improve the
validity and comprehensiveness of elder mistreatment occurrence estimates.
It is likely that household sampling, while extremely useful, will be incom-
plete to some degree because of difficulty in gaining access to those house-
holds and respondents most at risk of elder mistreatment. A particular
problem is accessing and characterizing the wide variety of assisted living
and related residential facilities where many vulnerable elders are located.
Developing additional ways to approach and access these populations may
require other sampling techniques, such as through social networks and
institutions, or the health care system.
      The clinical course, antecedents, and outcomes of the various types of
elder mistreatment occurrence are poorly understood, necessitating more
longitudinal investigations, including follow-up studies of the clinical, so-
cial, and psychological outcomes of elder mistreatment cases detected.
Many elder mistreatment situations are recurrent and may have various
incarnations over long periods, making the definition of an elder mistreat-
ment “event” difficult to define. Thus, further work on the nature, period-
icity, variation, and triggers for elder mistreatment are needed and will
require longitudinal investigations. Furthermore, the health and social
outcomes of elder mistreatment are not well studied and require further
investigation, an absolute requisite for prevention and intervention research.
      The occurrence of elder mistreatment in the institutional setting, in-
cluding hospitals, long-term care and assisted living situations, is all but
uncharacterized and needs new study sampling and detection methods.
Sampling and surveillance techniques may be different from those em-
ployed in community-based elder mistreatment detection, and considerable
innovation may be required.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                            5

      Studies are greatly needed that examine risk indicators and risk and
protective factors for different types of elder mistreatment. It may make
little conceptual sense to combine, for example, physical violence and ne-
glect as subsets of the same phenomenon. Because of the relatively larger
number of case-control studies focusing on physical violence, more reliable
information regarding risk factors has emerged for that manifestation of
elder mistreatment. Research is needed on risk factors for neglect, psycho-
logical mistreatment, sexual abuse, and financial abuse. Further, studies of
the co-occurrence of different abuse types, and risk factors for such co-
occurrence, are needed. This research should not neglect the study of
protective factors for elder mistreatment. A particularly critical need exists
for studies of risk factors for elder mistreatment in institutional settings.
      Research on risk factors should be expanded to take into consideration
the clinical course of elder mistreatment. Although longitudinal data are
absent, it seems probable that elder abuse situations may follow a pattern
similar to disease progression, which would include lead time prior to the
manifestation of active signs and symptoms of mistreatment; periods of
“remission”; and critical points in which mistreatment becomes more in-
tensive or acute. Some have speculated that mistreatment typically in-
creases in severity and intensity over time, but no empirical data demon-
strate this pattern or individual differences in progression. Clinical accounts
suggest that situations of mistreatment include cases that resolve on their
own, cases in which mistreatment intensifies, and cases in which the situa-
tion remains abusive but stable. It is therefore both possible and important
to identify risk factors for an increase or intensification in mistreatment.
For these reasons, cohort studies are of great importance in determining
risk factors for elder mistreatment.
      Substantial research is needed to improve and develop new methods of
screening for possible elder mistreatment in a range of clinical settings.
These methods should be able to detect a broad range of categories of
mistreatment and be highly accurate and efficiently deployed. Candidate
techniques might include improved questionnaire designs; record linkage to
other clinical, public health, social, and legal databases; automated alerts
based on concurrent clinical records; and previously defined risk status
based on prescreening methods. Special attention should be placed on the
predictive value of various clinical injuries and other relevant clinical find-
ings as indicators of mistreatment for therapeutic, social, and forensic rea-
sons.
      Research is needed on the process of designating cases as incidents of
mistreatment in order to improve criteria, investigative methods, decision-
making processes, and decision outcomes. The absence of a gold standard
for case identification, and the momentous consequences of inaccurate de-
cisions, highlight the need for studying and improving the process of case
6                                                      ELDER MISTREATMENT

investigation and designation. Research assessing the capacity of older
persons with cognitive impairments to provide accurate testimony is needed
for improving the accuracy of case identification, not only in clinical set-
tings, but also in legal settings, including prosecutorial decision making and
formal adjudication.
     Research on the effects of elder mistreatment interventions is urgently
needed. Existing interventions to prevent or ameliorate elder mistreatment
should be evaluated, and agencies funding new intervention programs
should require and fund a scientifically adequate evaluation as a compo-
nent of each grant. Specifically:

     • Research is needed on reporting practices and on the effects of
reporting, taking maximum advantage of the opportunity for comparisons
of practices and outcomes in states with and without mandated reporting.
     • Research is needed on the effectiveness of adult protective services
interventions, ideally in study designs that compare outcomes in cases in
which services were provided with those in which eligible recipients de-
clined offered services or other cases in which mistreatment of an equiva-
lent nature has been identified.
     • Intervention or prevention research in existing health care environ-
ments that come into contact with mistreated elders, such as hospitals,
emergency departments, and emergency response services, should be a pri-
ority, as it takes advantage of the existing expertise and resources of these
services.
     • The development of adult protective services/university research
teams should be encouraged in order to evaluate existing data, recommend
improvements in the collection of data, analyze incident reports, and design
the studies of outcomes urged in this report.

     Investigators and institutional review boards (IRBs) need clearer guid-
ance (without rigid rules) concerning two issues that tend to recur in elder
mistreatment research: conditions under which research can properly go
forward with participants whose decisional capacity is impaired, and the
proper responses to evidence of mistreatment elicited during the course of
the study. In the absence of better guidance, IRBs are left setting their own
criteria, leading to inconsistencies and confusion. Cooperative research
between agencies or organizations is also difficult, if not impossible, since
different IRBs often take different positions on these issues, including what
information must be disclosed to obtain informed consent.
     As a first step in this direction, the panel has sought to clarify some of
the issues in these two areas and to provide some needed guidance. Eventu-
ally, the National Institute on Aging, in consultation with the Office of
Human Research Protections and other federal partners, should take steps
to promote further clarification, thereby helping investigators and IRBs to
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                          7

achieve the proper level of participant protection while enabling important
research involving older and vulnerable adults to move forward.
     An adequate long-term funding commitment to research on elder mis-
treatment must be made by relevant federal, state, and private agencies to
support research careers and to develop the next generation of investigators
in the field. Knowledge about elder mistreatment will advance only if its
importance is recognized by policy makers and funding agencies, if stable
research support is provided, and if useful theories and methods are suc-
cessfully extrapolated from relevant disciplines and adjacent fields of re-
search.
     Recognizing that elder mistreatment crosses categorical boundaries in
both health research and social science research, federal funding agencies
(e.g., the National Institute on Aging, the Administration on Developmen-
tal Disabilities and Rehabilitation Research, and the National Institute of
Justice) should work collaboratively to promote research on the abuse and
financial exploitation of vulnerable adults, including older persons as well
as younger adults with disabilities.
     One promising approach for strengthening the scientific and political
foundation of the caregiving aspects of elder mistreatment research would
be to locate it in the domain of quality assurance in long-term care. It is
already understood that prevention of mistreatment is a core element of
quality assurance in nursing home regulation. Protecting elderly people in
community settings, including their own homes, represents a parallel chal-
lenge for public policy and an overlapping agenda for researchers aiming to
understand the phenomenology, etiology, and consequences of mistreat-
ment and the interventions that can reduce it. By viewing elder mistreat-
ment through the prism of quality assurance (safety and security) in long-
term care, it is possible to draw together the frameworks and methods of
researchers studying the needs of, and services provided to, vulnerable
elderly people in various long-term care settings, as well as those used by
researchers studying power and conflict in human relationships.


                              CONCLUSION
     Systematic implementation of these recommendations will help estab-
lish a sound foundation for advancing knowledge on elder mistreatment. A
genuine long-term commitment of resources to this important, though un-
derstudied, area will also help to recruit a new generation of scientists to
field. By the same token, however, it is clear that, in the absence of the
kinds of investment recommended in this report, knowledge and under-
standing of elder mistreatment will remain thin, even as the population ages
and the occurrence of mistreatment increases. A substantial commitment
to research is needed to inform and guide a caring society as it aims to cope
with the challenges ahead.
                                     1


                          Introduction




                      E    lder mistreatment is a recognized social problem
of uncertain, though probably increasing, magnitude. Based on the best
available estimates, between 1 and 2 million Americans 65 or older have
been injured, exploited, or otherwise mistreated by someone on whom they
depended for care or protection (Pillemer and Finkelhor, 1988; Pavlik et al.,
2001). The number of cases of elder mistreatment will undoubtedly in-
crease over the next several decades, as the population ages. Yet little is
known about its characteristics, causes, or consequences or about effective
means of prevention or management. This report is meant to point the way
toward better understanding of the nature and scope of the problem, a
necessary condition for the development of informed policies and pro-
grams. After summarizing the social context within which the field has
developed, this chapter assesses the present state of knowledge, identifies
some of the problems that must be addressed if the field is to move forward,
and locates the problem of elder mistreatment in a larger set of challenges
confronting an aging society.


           AN AGING AND VULNERABLE POPULATION
    The aging of the population of the United States is a well-recognized
demographic fact. The life expectancy of people born in the United States
has been rising throughout the past century. The proportion of the popula-
tion age 65 and older has increased dramatically since 1950. Between 1950
and 2000, the total population of the country increased by 87 percent, the

                                     9
10                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

population age 65 and older increased by 188 percent, and the population
85 and older increased by 635 percent (Eberhardt et al., 2001, Hetzel and
Smith, 2001). Over this same period, the life expectancy of people at age
65 increased from 13.9 to 17.9 years (Natonal Center for Health Statistics,
unpublished data, 2001). These trends will likely be accentuated by the
aging of the post-WWII baby boom generation. The U.S. Bureau of the
Census predicts that by 2030, the population over age 65 will nearly triple
to more than 70 million people, and older people will make up more than
20 percent of the population (up from 12.3 percent in 1990) (Population
Projections Program, 2000).
     It is heartening that large proportions of the nation’s older people are
living without substantial disability. Among people age 75 and older in
1999, 70 percent described their health as good or excellent (Eberhardt et
al., 2001). Inevitably, however, the aging of the population is also associ-
ated with increases in age-related diseases and disabilities. Of the estimated
12.8 million Americans reporting need for assistance with activities of daily
living (ADLs—eating, dressing, bathing, transferring between the bed and a
chair, toileting, controlling bladder and bowel) or instrumental activities of
daily living (IADLs—preparing meals, performing housework, taking drugs,
going on errands, managing finances, using a telephone), 57 percent (7.3
million people) were over the age of 65 (Administration on Aging, 1997).
Dementia is present in approximately 5 to 10 percent of persons age 65 and
older and 30 to 39 percent of persons age 85 and older (Rice et al., 2001;
Henderson, 1998). Among people age 85 and older in 1999, 33 percent
reported themselves to be in fair or poor health, 84 percent had disabilities
involving mobility (unpublished data Natonal Center for Health Statistics,
2002), and 16 percent had Alzheimer’s disease (Brookmeyer et al., 1998).
     Given the projected growth in the elderly population, long-term care
for elderly people with disabilities has become an increasingly urgent policy
concern (Institute of Medicine, 2001; Stone, 2000). The settings in which
long-term care is provided depend on a variety of factors, including the
older person’s needs and preferences, the availability of informal support,
and the source of reimbursement for care. An increasing number of elderly
people reside outside traditional home settings in highly restrictive institu-
tional environments (such as skilled or intermediate nursing facilities) or in
less restrictive community-based residential settings, such as assisted living
facilities, board and care homes, and adult foster homes. Among the 34
million persons over age 65 in 1995, 5 percent were nursing home resi-
dents, and 12 percent lived in the community setting with ADL or IADL
limitations. The number of nursing home residents increased between
1973–1974 and 1999 from 961,500 to 1,469,500 among those age 65 and
older, and from 413,6000 to 757,100 among those 85 and older (Eberhardt
et al., 2001). In 1999, another 500,000 elderly people were living in
INTRODUCTION                                                                11

assisted living facilities (Hawes et al., 1999). Among people age 85 and
over, 21 percent were in nursing homes in 1995 and 49 percent were
community residents with long-term care needs (Alecxih et al., 1997).
     The nursing home population tends to be older and more severely
disabled than elders residing elsewhere, with about half of the residents
being 85 or older and about half having five ADL limitations, in 1996
(Stone, 2000); still, four out of five elderly persons with ADL or IADL
impairments lived in the community setting (Alecxih et al., 1997). Ap-
proximately 17 percent of these community-dwelling older persons are
considered severely disabled, with limitations in three or more ADLs. Of
those ADL-impaired elderly people living in community settings, 37 percent
report that they need help but do not receive it or receive less help than is
needed (Stone, 2000).
     Most long-term care for community-dwelling elders is provided in a
traditional home setting, either in an older person’s own home, with or
without a spouse, or in the home of a close relative. The 1994 National
Long Term Care Survey indicated that more than 7 million Americans,
mainly family members, provided 120 million hours of care to elders with
functional disabilities living in the community. However, the nature and
character of the informal networks now providing long-term care services
may change (Stone, 2000). The potential pool of adult children who can
serve as caregivers is already decreasing, as a result of a variety of demo-
graphic trends, including divorce, smaller families, and increased workforce
participation (Himes et al., 1996). These factors increase the pressures on
families caring for their elderly relatives and also are likely to increase the
demand for institutional care.
     These trends highlight the growing challenge of ensuring the safety and
protecting the other interests of elderly people in the diverse settings in
which long-term care is provided. No matter where they reside, older
people are vulnerable not only to the infirmities and suffering associated
with disease and disability, but also to neglect, victimization, and exploita-
tion by others, including their caregivers. In this respect, protecting older
people from mistreatment is an important element of the broad challenge of
ensuring quality services in long-term care.
     While elder mistreatment has attracted sustained efforts from practitio-
ners and some interest from policy makers over the past two decades, it has
not received concomitant attention from researchers or from the agencies
that provide research funding. No major foundation has identified this
field as one of its priorities, and the federal investment has been modest at
best. For example, fewer than 15 studies on elder mistreatment have been
funded by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) since 1990, and support
from other agencies has been even less substantial. As a result, elder mis-
treatment research has thus far been confined to a small community of
12                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

investigators who have produced a modest body of knowledge concerning
the phenomenology, magnitude, etiology, and consequences of elder mis-
treatment. Preventive and remedial interventions have been unsystematic,
episodic, and poorly evaluated. In recognition of these deficiencies, the
National Institute on Aging requested the National Research Council to
commission this study as the first step in an effort to broaden and deepen
knowledge about the mistreatment of elders. Support was also provided by
the Office of Behavioral and Social Science Research on Women’s Health of
the National Institutes of Health and the Agency for Health Care Research
and Quality. This report presents a research agenda for consideration by
the National Institute on Aging and other potential sponsors of research on
elder mistreatment—a term we explain more fully in Chapter 2.


                HISTORICAL AND SOCIAL CONTEXT
     Research on elder mistreatment is in an early stage, reflecting its rela-
tively recent recognition as a distinct—and important—social problem. The
prevailing understanding of the problem, and the social response to it, have
gradually emerged over the past half-century, shaped by evolving social
responses to child protection and family violence as well as by an intensify-
ing concern about neglect and victimization of vulnerable elderly people.
     Family discord and mistreatment of its vulnerable members were out-
side the public domain for much of this country’s history. Responsibility
for assisting families in need was assumed mainly by religious organizations
and private charitable institutions. Although many states established asy-
lums for people with mental illness during the 18th and 19th centuries,
thereby providing some custodial protection for dependent or neglected
adults, there was no legal basis for intervention into families until the late
19th century, when industrialization, immigration, and urbanization exac-
erbated family problems, including poverty and internal conflict, and also
exposed them to public view—especially when its victims were children.
The emergence of the juvenile court in the early part of the 20th century
represented a significant assertion of collective responsibility for protecting
and “saving” children who had become ungovernable by their parents; over
the following decades, the jurisdiction of the juvenile courts gradually
reached children who were neglected or abused by their parents (Platt,
1969).
     The legal foundation for modern policies and programs for elder pro-
tection was put in place after World War II, particularly during a burst of
national energy geared toward remediation of endemic social problems
during the 1970s. Although the threads of child protection, adult protec-
tion, and family violence were intertwined in the history of that period, they
are summarized separately below.
INTRODUCTION                                                               13

                        Origins of Child Protection
    The current system for protection of elders and other vulnerable adults
grew from the child protection system, which itself is only about 40 years
old in its modern form. The seminal event in the formation of the modern
child protection system was the publication of an article in the Journal of
the American Medical Association by a team of physicians at the University
of Colorado, who proclaimed the existence of a “battered child syndrome”
(Kempe et al., 1962). Pediatrician Henry Kempe, the leader of the group
and founder of the International Society for Prevention of Child Abuse and
Neglect, spearheaded a movement to adopt mandated reporting laws. These
laws, which were quickly adopted in all 50 states, rested on the premise that
the abused child was an aberrant problem (amounting to several hundred
egregious cases each year in the United States), and on the belief that the
problem could be solved if health professionals brought those cases to the
attention of social service authorities. Although initial federal action did
not occur until significantly later, with the adoption of the Child Abuse
Prevention and Treatment Act of 1974 (Nelson, 1984), that legislation also
required states to adopt mandated reporting and investigation as the pri-
mary strategy for protecting children.


                        Origins of Adult Protection
     Drawing on their parens patriae authority to protect helpless citizens, a
few states developed new public welfare programs during the 1940s and
1950s to protect adults who could not manage their own resources or
protect themselves from harm. New adult protective services units were
established not only to provide social services, but also to provide legal
services, such as guardianship. Aroused by these state innovations, federal
interest in the problem first appeared in the 1960s. Legislation was directed
at all adults who were seen as defenseless and susceptible to being hurt by
others. In 1962 Congress passed the Public Welfare Amendments to the
Social Security Act, authorizing payments to the states to establish protec-
tive services for “persons with physical and/or mental limitations, who
were unable to manage their own affairs . . . or who were neglected or
exploited” (U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, 1966).
     One of the demonstration projects funded by this new program was
operated by a team at the Benjamin Rose Institute in Cleveland under
Margaret Blenkner and her associates (Blenkner et al., 1974; Anetzberger et
al., 2000). She matched a group of elders receiving protective services with
a group from the community who were receiving traditional services, find-
ing that those who were receiving protective services had a higher mortality
rate and higher nursing home placement rate than those who were receiving
14                                                      ELDER MISTREATMENT

traditional services. This study raised important questions: Was the higher
risk attributable to the intervention or to selection bias, and if the former,
what aspect of the intervention increased the risk? Was it the nursing home
placement? Notwithstanding this puzzling finding from the Blenkner study
and other studies questioning the cost-effectiveness of protective services
(Wolfe, this volume), advocates for the system continued to press for
broader congressional action. Eventually, in 1974, Congress amended the
Social Security Act to require states to establish protective service units for
adults with mental and physical impairments, who are unable to manage on
their own, and who were victims or were being exploited or neglected.
Funding for the protective services was to come from social services block
grants (SSBG) given by the federal government to the states. Until this time,
most SSBG funds had been used exclusively for child protective services.
     This new federal program directed the states to provide protective
services to adults who, “as a result of physical or mental limitations, are
unable to act in their own behalf; are seriously limited in the management
of their affairs; are neglected or exploited; or are living in unsafe or hazard-
ous conditions.” A number of states then codified this federal mandate
and, by 1978, 20 states had legislation establishing adult protection units as
part of their social services agencies. This trend was accompanied by
increasing use of SSBG dollars for adult protection: in 1980, 38 states
reported that 83.3 million SSBG dollars were spent for adult protective
services. As SSBG appropriations declined during the 1980s, however,
funding for adult protective services declined; by 1985, it had declined by
42 percent.


                        Spotlight on Elder Protection
     Scarce attention was paid to the problem of elder abuse before 1978
except for some intermittent articles published in British and American
medical and social services journals. In the late 1970s, the national spot-
light was directed for the first time at what was characterized as systematic
mistreatment of elderly people. Congressman Claude Pepper held widely
publicized hearings, calling attention to the “hidden problem” of elder
abuse in the nation’s families, including what one witness characterized as
“granny battering” (Wolfe, this volume). Although the Pepper hearings did
not lead immediately to federal action or funding, they stimulated addi-
tional state action. As the state response continued to evolve in the early
1980s, many states required reporting of abuse, bringing the problem within
the purview of adult protective services. By 1985, 46 states had designated
a responsible agency. Meanwhile, Congressman Pepper continued to agi-
tate for a federal response to elder mistreatment. In a 1981 report (Pepper
INTRODUCTION                                                              15

and Okar, 1981), he stated that elder abuse was increasing and recom-
mended that Congress act immediately to help the states identify and assist
elder abuse victims. Again, however, Pepper’s plea was unheeded by the
Congress. Finally, in 1989, Pepper succeeded in including creation of a
national center on elder abuse as an amendment to the Older Americans
Act. Although various versions of a national center followed, the current
National Center on Elder Abuse was established in 1998.
    In retrospect, it appears that elder mistreatment became identified as a
national concern when it was conceptualized as an “aging” issue, rather
than as an undifferentiated component of adult protection. This also helped
to broaden the constituencies interested in research and program develop-
ment to include gerontologists and the expanding network of service pro-
viders and advocates for the elderly. The Pepper hearings also cast the
problem of elder abuse in a particular light—as a complication of caregiving.
The emerging image was that of an impaired victim, usually an elderly
parent being cared for by an adult caregiver who wasn’t able to manage the
caregiving because of stresses in life, on the job, and in the family. Even
though it is only a partial explanation of elder mistreatment, this picture
seemed to resonate with Congress and the media (Wolfe, this volume).


                Emerging Conceptions of Family Violence
    The evolving understanding of elder mistreatment as a social problem
has more recently been shaped by another image—the trapped victim of
family violence. Spouse abuse and other varieties of intimate partner vio-
lence have received increasing professional and political attention since the
1980s, leading to a wide variety of interventions and a substantial invest-
ment in research (National Research Council, 1996; National Research
Council and Institute of Medicine, 1998). Prevention, protection, and
punishment are necessary components of a comprehensive social response,
requiring the participation and coordination of a broad array of public
agencies. As the consciousness of health professionals has been raised,
family violence has been embraced as a public health problem, thereby
recruiting researchers and advocates in injury prevention and public health
to the field (Institute of Medicine, 1999). Many of the preventive and
protective tools developed in the context of intimate partner violence have
now been directed to violence against elders. Bringing elder mistreatment
into the domain of family violence widens the angle of the lens and thereby
brings new ideas about etiology and prevention into view. However, it also
exposes some tensions between social services agencies, with their tradi-
tional helping orientation, and many family violence specialists, with their
greater emphasis on criminalization and punishment of perpetrators.
16                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

                       The Crisis in Child Protection
     Evolving conceptions of elder mistreatment, and the appropriate social
responses to it, will also be shaped, inevitably, by the deep concerns that
have emerged over the past decade in the field of child protection. In 1990,
the U.S. Advisory Board on Child Abuse and Neglect issued a highly publi-
cized and rarely disputed declaration of a national emergency in the child
protection system. By that time, the number of cases reported annually to
state and county social service and law enforcement agencies in the United
States approached 3 million—a number enormously discrepant from the
1962 estimate of Kempe et al. of approximately 300 cases annually. More-
over, the advisory board found that, by state social service agencies’ own
admission, many children officially found to have been maltreated received
no services other than the investigation itself.
     The U.S. Advisory Board on Child Abuse and Neglect (1990) attributed
the emergency to the errant design of the child protection system itself: the
system has become preoccupied by investigation (rather than prevention
and treatment), and community responsibility for ensuring the safety of
dependent children has effectively, if unintentionally, been diverted to a
small social service agency. In response, the board (U.S. Advisory Board on
Child Abuse and Neglect, 1993) proposed a new national strategy designed
to rely on voluntary action to make child protection a part of everyday life
(see Melton and Barry, 1994, Melton et al., 2001, for edited books articu-
lating the social science foundation for this approach). As Wolfe notes in
his paper in this volume, several states have attempted to deemphasize
investigation in their state child protection statutes, and some major foun-
dations have undertaken initiatives to demonstrate the feasibility of a neigh-
borhood-based, largely voluntary, and largely preventive and supportive
child protection system. Nonetheless, modal practice is largely unchanged,
and the enormity of the problem remains (Melton, 2002).
     The tensions in child protection policy (as well as the number of re-
ported cases) have intensified as the scope of problems defined as child
maltreatment has expanded. Although the modern system was created in
response to the image of battered children, neglect has long been the modal
reason for referral to child protection (Peddle and Wang, 2001), and most
such cases involve complex social and economic problems, not willful ne-
glect (Pelton, 1994). Similarly, the biggest increase in reporting occurred
when sexual abuse was “discovered” early in the 1980s (Weisberg, 1984),
and criminal prosecution became a common feature in the child protection
system.
     Recognition of the frequent linkage between intimate partner violence
and child maltreatment (see Carter et al., 1999) has also challenged the
child protection system, which generally (except to some degree in cases of
INTRODUCTION                                                               17

sexual abuse and severe physical abuse) has not adopted the “perpetrator-
victim” model commonly embraced by advocates for battered women
(Melton and Andrews, 2000). There are some signs of an uneasy rap-
prochement between the two systems (see, e.g., Schechter and Edleson,
1999), as some child protection authorities have adopted safety planning, a
feature of victim empowerment in programs for battered women, as a
potentially useful element of intervention in cases of child maltreatment.
     Even this development, however, has illustrated the field’s vulnerability
to unintended side effects. For example, a legislative determination in
Minnesota that exposure of children to intimate partner violence is per se
evidence of child neglect led to an immediate doubling of referrals to child
protective services, a huge increase in expenditures, and increased stress
and loss of confidentiality for women and their families living in shelters
(Edleson, 2000). It was also speculated that this policy, soon retracted by
the legislature, deterred some battered women from seeking protection for
themselves and their children.
     These tensions and policy adaptations in the field of child protection
appear to be highly relevant to elder protection at this moment in the
evolution of research and public policy in this nascent field. As discussed
further in Chapter 6, adult protection services agencies grapple daily with
the tensions between investigation and service, and prosecution and protec-
tion. Agency caseloads reflect the highly diverse problems within their
jurisdictions, ranging from intentional partner violence to far more numer-
ous cases of caregiver neglect (as well as problems not arising in child
protection, such as financial exploitation). The recent history of child
protection offers many lessons for specialists in elder mistreatment.

                              Looking Ahead
    Prevailing conceptions of elder mistreatment draw on a diverse array of
images (the forgotten and helpless nursing home resident, the battered
granny, the stressed caregiver, the abusing spouse). Moreover, the system
of adult protection that has emerged to respond to these varied problems
(as well as other problems relating to adults with disabilities) is based on
ideas and structures borrowed from policy and practice in child maltreat-
ment and, more recently, intimate partner violence. Yet prevailing policies
and practices in these adjacent domains are not fully applicable to elder
mistreatment and have been controversial on their own terms. Repeatedly,
National Research Council and Institute of Medicine panels have called
attention to the need for sustained and aggressive research on the phenom-
enology, magnitude, etiology, and consequences of these problems and on
the effects of interventions (National Research Council, 1993, 1996; Na-
tional Research Council and Institute of Medicine, 1998). In so doing, they
18                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

have noted that very little is known about the phenomenology, magnitude,
etiology, and consequences of elder mistreatment, and that almost nothing
is known about the effects of interventions. Although the body of evidence
remains sparse, researchers have recently begun to raise doubts about the
cost-effectiveness of current interventions (Dyer et al., 1999; Harrell et al.,
2002; Pavlik et al., 2001; Hajjar and Duthie, 2001; Wolf and Li, 1999).
     Overall, the national response to elder mistreatment still remains weak
and incomplete. Adult protection is a poorly funded system, and Congress-
man Pepper’s single-minded emphasis on the abuse, exploitation, and ne-
glect of vulnerable elderly people has not been sustained by his successors in
Congress or by a public preoccupied with youthfulness and ill at ease with
aging. As a result, elder mistreatment remains hidden, poorly character-
ized, and largely unaddressed—more than two decades after the Pepper
hearings first exposed it to public view. It is long past time to move the field
forward in a careful and systematic way, drawing on the knowledge already
generated in the domains of child maltreatment and intimate partner vio-
lence, while remedying the weaknesses that have so far plagued the field.


                WEAKNESSES IN EXISTING RESEARCH
     Although there is a sizable body of unpublished reports and commen-
tary on elder mistreatment, fewer than 50 peer-reviewed articles based on
empirical research have been published in the field. (A summary of these
studies appears in Appendix A.) Although these studies provide a founda-
tion for further work, it is not a strong one. National Research Council
(1993) and Institute of Medicine reports (2001; National Research Council
and Institute of Medicine, 1998) and other authoritative reviews (e.g.,
Pillemer, 2001; National Institute of Justice, 2000) have repeatedly la-
mented the weakness of the research base for designing programs and
informing policy on the wide variety of overlapping problems, ranging
from granny battering to neglect by nursing homes, that are grouped under
the rubric of elder mistreatment. A systematic program of research is
needed to better describe the many facets of the problem and to explore
their causes and consequences.
     Understanding the nature and scope of the problem is prerequisite to
designing and implementing solutions. In the absence of the necessary
research, interventions have been designed and implemented in the dark, so
to speak. Almost every state has required reporting of suspected cases of
elder mistreatment, but little is known about the effects of these require-
ments (National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, 1998). A few
states and localities have mounted some creative interventions, but these
few initiatives have been poorly evaluated. It has often been said that elder
INTRODUCTION                                                                19

mistreatment, as a field of research, is at about the same embryonic stage of
development as child mistreatment was about 30-40 years ago.
    Some of the weaknesses of elder mistreatment research are summarized
below.


                    Unclear and Inconsistent Definitions
     The first major difficulty in analyzing results from previous research on
elder abuse and neglect results from the poor definition of the term “elder
abuse.” To some extent, this problem is a reflection of conceptual confu-
sion: What type of behavior or condition is denoted by the concept of
“abuse”? To some extent, it is also traceable to the variations and ambigu-
ities of the state statutes that direct or authorize interventions in cases of
elder abuse or neglect. (The statutes are discussed in Chapter 2.) However,
researchers have often exacerbated the problem by failing to define or
operationalize their terms in a clear and objective way. For example, many
researchers refer to the entire range of problems experienced by elders as
“abuse,” including lack of proper housing, untreated medical conditions,
and lack of social services. Most of the studies are weakened by their
undifferentiated treatment of various types of abuse and neglect. That is,
all forms of mistreatment are lumped together, despite evidence that the
forms of abuse and neglect differ substantially. In some studies, for ex-
ample, it is difficult to determine whether financial exploitation is included
in the research definition. Studies are especially weakened by their inclu-
sion of the category “self-abuse” or “self-neglect.” As discussed below,
these terms refer to a category of conditions that has little in common with
the conditions that bear on abuse and neglect of elder persons by other
people.
     Researchers have also diverged widely in their definitions of the perti-
nent component terms and have frequently used confusing and unclear
definitions. For example, some researchers have used the term “abuse”
tautologically; for example, one group of researchers defined elder abuse as
“an abusive action inflicted by the abusers on adults 60 years of age or
older.” Another group called elder neglect and abuse “a generic term that
refers to the neglect and/or physical, psychological, or financial abuse of the
older person.” Furthermore, definitions have differed so widely from study
to study that the results of research are almost impossible to compare.
While one set of investigators calls “withholding of personal care” physical
abuse, a second researcher calls it active neglect; a third subsumes such
actions under physical neglect; and yet a fourth considers such behaviors to
be “psychological neglect.” Similarly, some researchers define physical
abuse in terms of actions: hitting, pushing, choking, etc. Others, however,
20                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

use lists of injuries to define physical elder abuse, such as cuts, fractures,
bruises, and burns.
     The development of better definitions of mistreatment of the elderly
should be an extremely high priority for researchers. In particular, it is
critical to differentiate among various types of mistreatment. Researchers
must be clear and explicit regarding what is included and excluded from the
category of elder abuse in order to conduct any meaningful meta-analyses.
The panel addresses this problem in the next chapter.


                     Unclear and Inadequate Measures
     Related to the definitional issue is that of measurement. This is an
equally vexing problem, since the definitions of the varying elements of
elder abuse must be operationalized through the design and administration
of a research instrument. Many studies have not developed separate re-
search instruments at all; instead, they have simply analyzed the forms used
by agencies. These forms are not designed for research and rarely provide
data of the type and quality to be of use to researchers. Or studies use as a
“measure” of abuse whether a professional has identified an elderly person
as “abused”—thereby embracing without further clarification the discre-
tionary judgments of clinicians and caseworkers applying the ambiguous
statutory definitions. Few attempts have been made to create reliable and
valid instruments for the studies. Even when research instruments have
been used, researchers have used highly varying approaches.
     An example to illustrate this point may be in order. Researcher A
includes physical abuse in her definition of elder abuse. She is using the
Conflict Tactics Scale, which measures physical acting out in response to
conflict. She then proceeds to define physical abuse as a single incident in
which the elder is hit, bit, punched, kicked, threatened with a weapon, or
has a weapon used on him or her. Researcher B also includes physical
abuse in his definition of elder abuse. However, he has developed his own
scale, similar to the Conflict Tactics Scale but more broadly constructed, so
that it measures any assaultive behavior of hitting, biting, kicking, punch-
ing, threatening with a weapon, or using a weapon regardless of the reason
for the behavior. Furthermore, he decides that there must be at least two
episodes of this behavior for it to be called physical abuse except for those
items dealing with weapons, in which case one incident is sufficient. Thus
both researchers have included physical abuse in their studies—indeed, it
may be the sole focus of each researcher’s study—but the measure of physi-
cal abuse differs across the two studies.
     This problem arises for all of the types of elder mistreatment typically
investigated, including neglect and financial exploitation. The lack of defi-
nitional consistency poses issues for interpretation and understanding across
INTRODUCTION                                                                 21

studies, including determining prevalence and risk factors. However, even
if researchers embraced a common set of definitions for the elements of
elder mistreatment and operationalized them the same way, that would still
leave the problem of determining whether the instruments actually measure
what they purport to measure (validity) and whether they can be reliably
administered. At the present time, no measure of elder mistreatment has
been validated, nor has any instrument been embraced by the field as a
definitive measure of mistreatment, even within a narrow sphere.
     All this suggests that researchers, policy makers, and other consumers
of research on elder mistreatment must pay careful attention to the defini-
tions and measures of any studies on which they rely. In most cases, the
measures will not be comparable.


                  Incompleteness of Professional Accounts
     Since the earliest stages of elder abuse research, surveys of professionals
have been used to shed light on the prevalence of elder abuse and on risk
factors. Investigators typically mail surveys to professionals and parapro-
fessionals, asking them about contacts with cases of elder abuse or neglect
during a given time period. To provide a typical example, in a survey on
elder abuse funded by the Administration on Aging, a sample of profession-
als, including administrators and direct service workers from 16 types of
agencies, was surveyed in each of Pennsylvania’s 67 counties. Overall, one-
half of the responding agencies reported encountering elder abuse, ranging
from over 90 percent of domestic violence agencies, to less than 30 percent
for law enforcement, emergency services, medical clinics, and drug/alcohol
agencies (Fiegener et al., 1989). Similarly, a survey of Alabama physicians
and registered and licensed practical nurses found that 38 percent of the
physicians and 53 percent of the nurses had seen cases of elder abuse in the
previous year (Clark-Daniels et al., 1990).
     At best, studies of professional experience provide impressionistic esti-
mates and opinions about the prevalence, correlates, and consequences of
elder mistreatment. Although such data may be useful for generating hy-
potheses for further research, they do not provide a sound basis for design-
ing programs or formulating policies.
     Elder mistreatment researchers have also relied on samples of cases that
have come to the formal attention of a social agency or reporting authority.
For example, records of patients at hospitals or social service agencies have
been reviewed, and the percentage of elderly persons judged to have been
abused is established. A more controlled version of this kind of study
provides agency caseworkers or health professionals with a standardized
assessment tool, which they are trained to fill out for clients. The “Three
Model Projects on Elder Abuse,” funded by the Administration on Aging,
22                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

used such methods (Wolf et al., 1984). In both types of studies, however,
researchers obtained data from professional accounts of mistreatment rather
than from interviews with victims themselves.
    It is widely recognized that reported cases are highly selective samples,
and that there is a large reservoir of unreported and undetected cases of
elder mistreatment about which very little is known. Although unreported
cases may be similar to reported cases, they also may be quite different.
Samples of reported cases may suggest common patterns and correlates of
mistreatment, especially when paired with a control group, but the data
must be interpreted with great care. Most important, the question of the
extent of elder mistreatment cannot be answered by studies of reported
cases. There are major problems with focusing on reported cases:

     • The studies are primarily based on cases uncovered through sur-
veys of community professionals—public health nurses, social workers,
legal aid lawyers, etc. They are thus cases that have come to public atten-
tion in one way or another. However, we know from other studies of
family violence using nonclinical populations that only a fraction of cases
involving serious mistreatment comes to public attention and that these
cases are not necessarily representative of the problem at large. (In relation
to child abuse, for example, see the 1995 Gallup Poll, finding that far more
of America’s children are victims of physical and sexual abuse than offi-
cially reported—Gallup Poll, 1995.)
     • Similarly, in most cases, the research data on elder mistreatment
have not come directly from victims, but instead from professionals and
outside observers. Such secondhand knowledge may distort the actual
dynamics of mistreatment by failing to present the problems and their
effects, as the actual participants perceive them.
     • Case reports have little value in studying some forms of mistreat-
ment that are rarely reported to adult protective services agencies, such as
mistreatment in institutional settings.

     Because elder mistreatment studies have relied so heavily on reports
from professionals, crucial data about abuse situations have been missed.
Community professionals in general do not collect data useful to research-
ers and policy makers. Thus, previous research using agency records has
rarely been able to obtain detailed information about family history, atti-
tudes, and consequences of mistreatment and other issues. Some research-
ers (e.g., Lachs et al., 1997a) have made effective use of these weak datasets
by matching cases with higher-quality datasets.
     In an effort to generate a national estimate of the occurrence of elder
abuse and neglect based on case-identification by professional “sentinels,”
the National Center of Elder Abuse, in conjunction with Westat, Inc.,
INTRODUCTION                                                               23

conducted the National Elder Abuse Incidence Study (National Center on
Elder Abuse, 1998). In this study, modeled after recent incidence studies of
child abuse, the researchers identified a nationally representative sample of
20 counties in 15 states; for each county sampled, they collected data from
the local APS agency as well as approximately 1100 professional “senti-
nels” having frequent contact with the elderly. In 1996, according to the
projections based on this study, about 450,000 persons age 60 or older
experienced abuse or neglect in family settings, about 16 percent of whom
were in the APS report files. It is generally acknowledged that these find-
ings detect only the most overt cases and thus significantly underestimate
the incidence of elder mistreatment.
     Studies of professionals and agency records are justified in those situa-
tions in which investigators specifically want to know how professionals
view elder mistreatment. But researchers have too often used these profes-
sional surveys to estimate the incidence or prevalence of elder mistreatment,
or to establish its causes. They are not appropriate for these purposes.
Future research in this area should go beyond archival data and should rely
to a much greater extent on elder persons’ accounts of their experiences and
on their perceptions regarding their own security.


                      Lack of Population-Based Data
    Data on the extent of elder mistreatment in the general population are
sparse. Representative sample surveys of community populations are ur-
gently needed. Over the past two decades, knowledge about violence in
families and the victimization of children and other vulnerable people has
improved significantly. A major advance has been the fielding of major
population-based victimization surveys that have helped to establish reli-
able prevalence estimates of select problems, such as intimate partner vio-
lence and child physical and sexual abuse. Similar progress has not oc-
curred in the field of elder mistreatment.
    In the earliest research about two decades ago, studies were generally
conducted on small, nonrandom samples, with little generalizabilty to the
population. Furthermore, research in the field was conducted indepen-
dently by investigators from different disciplines, using different methods
and without recognizing the problems faced by other investigators. For
example, the medical community focused on clinical signs and symptoms
that could not be explained by disease markers, and this was a daunting
task. Very often, older adults who had multiple chronic diseases or condi-
tions might have symptoms that could mask or mimic mistreatment. Using
a patient-based approach to study elder mistreatment is also fraught with
potential for sample bias, in that if an older adult does not have a doctor or
24                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

does not come to the emergency department, mistreatment cannot be evalu-
ated.
     Although some population surveys have subsequently been fielded,
many of them have excluded from the sample potential respondents who
may be at high risk for abuse or neglect—e.g., older adults with profound
dementia, severe hearing or speech impediments, or advanced problems
with mobility who are unable to participate in survey research. Although
some investigators have tried to use proxy respondents, this method poses
even more challenging issues, because the proxy may be implicating him or
herself in mistreatment.
     Prevalence information (for one community in the United States) was
best established by Pillemer and Finkelhor (1988), who used a stratified
random sample of community dwelling older persons (65 or older) in the
Boston metropolitan area. A two-stage interview process was used: screen-
ing to determine if the person was a victim of mistreatment (defined to
include physical abuse and psychological abuse and neglect but excluding
financial abuse), followed by in-depth interviews by telephone or in per-
son. Since 1988, there has been no effort in the United States to obtain
better prevalence data using large-scale random samples on either a locally
or nationally representative sample. However, four such studies have been
undertaken in Canada (Podnieks, 1992), the United Kingdom (Ogg and
Bennett, 1992), Finland (Kivela et al., 1992), and The Netherlands (Comijs
et al., 1998). Despite using different methods, these studies each reported
that the prevalence of elder abuse falls in the 3-5 percent range. (It should
be noted, however, that the scope and content of the definitions used in
these studies vary, particularly with regard to financial abuse.) Despite
attempts to estimate incidence and prevalence in other ways, random
sample surveys of the elderly population alone allow for a more accurate
assessment of the rate of elder mistreatment. In the United States, a
national survey is urgently needed to estimate the prevalence of different
types of elder mistreatment in the general population, and in specific re-
gions and subgroups, as well as the co-occurrence of different forms of
mistreatment (see Chapter 4).


                         Lack of Prospective Data
    Prospective studies are powerful designs, in that they can overcome the
recall bias inherent in retrospective studies based on self-reported mistreat-
ment. Studies of this kind are urgently needed: to date, no prospective
study of elder abuse has been conducted. However, in a pioneering study,
Lachs and colleagues retrospectively linked Adult Protective Services data
to a prospective study—the New Haven EPESE study (Established Popula-
tion for Epidemiologic Studies in the Elderly) as the basis for this research,
INTRODUCTION                                                                25

one of four cohorts funded by NIA (Lachs et al., 1996). In inception year
1982, the study sample consisted of 2,812 community-dwelling older adults
over age 65. A manual record matching of EPESE and Connecticut om-
budsman/elderly protective service records was done to determine if any
cohort members had been seen by ombudsmen over an 11-year follow-up
period from cohort inception (1982-1992 inclusive). After cohort members
who were seen by protective services for the elderly were identified, weighted
survival curves from cohort inception were constructed for three subgroups
of subjects: (1) those found to have sustained verified elder mistreatment
(abuse, neglect, or exploitation) by another party (i.e., nonself-neglect), (2)
those seen by protective services for corroborated self-neglect, or (3) other
members of the cohort who had no contact with elderly protective services.


                          Lack of Control Groups
     Much of the data on risk factors and consequences of elder mistreat-
ment are drawn from studies of clinical case samples. However, few of
these studies have used controlled designs. For this reason, generalizations
made from the existing studies are necessarily suspect. For example, some
investigators have asserted that the abused elderly tend to be physically or
mentally impaired or both. However, without a comparison group, it is
impossible to know if they are more or less impaired than other persons.
Several studies have attempted to go beyond previous efforts by interview-
ing the victims themselves and including a control group of nonabused
elderly persons (Bristowe and Collins, 1989; Paveza et al., 1992; Pillemer
and Finkelhor, 1988). These are still few and far between, however. Inter-
estingly, although a number of controlled studies were conducted in the late
1980s and early 1990s, there are virtually no examples of more recent case-
control studies of elder mistreatment.


                   Lack of Systematic Evaluation Studies
     There has been almost no effort to evaluate intervention programs for
elder abuse. Certainly, no study has as yet attempted a randomized control
group design in this area. Any kind of experimental demonstration project
is rare. Little is known about the relative effectiveness of various programs.


                                  Summary
    Due to such shortcomings, existing studies have not provided adequate
data needed to answer three important public policy questions about elder
abuse and neglect:
26                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

     First, is the problem of sufficient magnitude to warrant large-scale
public concern, including such measures as mandatory reporting laws and
protective services? Better data on the true prevalence of elder mistreat-
ment are needed in deciding what action government ought to take.
     Second, what are the characteristics of locations, conditions, situations,
and relationships in which the elderly are most vulnerable to mistreatment?
To design and implement intervention programs, policy makers and service
providers must learn more about the factors that increase or decrease the
risk of mistreatment and the conditions that ensure safety.
     Third, what interventions prevent elder mistreatment and ameliorate
its effects? Extensive evaluation research using scientifically sound research
designs is critically needed.


      IMPEDIMENTS TO ELDER MISTREATMENT RESEARCH
    Why is knowledge about elder mistreatment so underdeveloped? What
accounts for the paucity of sound research in this important area? The
panel has identified a number of explanatory factors.

     1. Many investigators believe that victims and family members are not
suitable respondents for interview studies of elder mistreatment, because
they are not reliable respondents, because they are not willing to be inter-
viewed, or because they are incapable of giving the necessary consent. In
fact, many victims are more than willing to be interviewed and are reliable
respondents able to give the necessary consent. Surveys including such
respondents have uncovered serious cases of mistreatment, and a variety of
studies have been conducted in which victims have been interviewed.
     2. In general, methods that have been used successfully to investigate
other forms of family violence have not been applied to research on elder
mistreatment. Gerontologists who study elder mistreatment have tended to
follow their interests in family caregiving and have seen the problem in this
context. However, because much elder mistreatment does not occur in
family caregiving situations, this has been a serious limitation. Further-
more, the technology for studying family violence has been developed and
refined not by gerontologists, but by child abuse and intimate partner
researchers. Elder mistreatment researchers have not been trained in meth-
ods of studying other forms of family violence, including sampling method-
ologies and measurement techniques.
     One example of this problem is the lack of studies using the Conflict
Tactics Scale (Straus, 1978; Straus and Gelles, 1990, 1992) to study elder
mistreatment. Regardless of the occasional controversy over the scale, it is
a hallmark instrument that has been used in scores of studies of child abuse
INTRODUCTION                                                                  27

and intimate partner abuse. It is to some extent the state of the art, but
some elder mistreatment researchers do not seem to be aware of it.
     3. It is very difficult to obtain access to perpetrators of mistreatment.
In intimate partner studies, a number of researchers have used treatment
programs for batterers as sources of research subjects. These do not exist
for elder mistreatment.
     4. The exclusion of some victims can seriously bias samples. The
problem is most evident when residents of institutions are excluded alto-
gether from population samples. However, even within the targeted study
population (whether community dwelling or residing in institutions), exclu-
sion criteria based on cognitive deficiencies can seriously skew the findings.
     5. There is some anecdotal evidence that institutional review boards
have interpreted the Common Rule (the governing regulations on research
ethics) in an unduly restrictive fashion, impeding potentially valuable re-
search on elder mistreatment (see Chapter 8).
     6. Few investigators have been drawn to this field of inquiry. Reviews
of the literature reflect the same small set of names time and again, with few
new researchers selecting and remaining in this field. One of the reasons for
this situation is that so little funding has been available for research on elder
mistreatment. Although more outstanding investigators might have at-
tracted more funding, dedicated funding also could attract more and better
investigators. Although the total federal contribution to research on elder
mistreatment is uncertain, expenditures by NIA, the lead agency for aging
research, have totaled $10 million during the last 12 years (1990–2001).
Annual expenditures have increased from less than $300,000 per year in
1990 to over $1.3 million in 2001; this is a modest sum even in comparison
to the underfunded domain of child abuse research, on which federal agen-
cies spend $3.8 million each year.
     7. The existing body of research is largely descriptive and pragmatic,
taking the concepts and definitions used in practice or in statutes as given,
rather than deriving the concepts and measures from theoretical premises
or hypotheses. The atheoretical nature of the research is reflected in the
tendency to lump all forms of mistreatment within a single category.
     8. Individuals who have attempted to conduct research on elder abuse
report that they have sometimes been hindered by a lack of cooperation
from agencies responsible for identifying and treating victims of mistreat-
ment. Adult protective services programs and other elder abuse service
programs have been characteristically reluctant to assist researchers in re-
search activities, and especially research that involves interviews with vic-
tims and their families. Reasons for lack of agency cooperation include a
desire to protect their clients’ privacy and to prevent additional disruption
in their lives, fear of evaluation research, and a shortage of staff time to
devote to research.
28                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

     9. Although every state has enacted a statute authorizing or directing
intervention in cases involving vulnerable adults, including the elderly, these
statutes vary widely in almost every respect (see Appendix B and tables in
Chapter 2). They specify different ages or circumstance under which a
victim is eligible for protective services, often differentiating between in-
home and institutional abuse. They also vary in definitions of abuse,
classification of abuse as civil or criminal, whether reporting is mandatory
or voluntary, and the remedies or resources available when abuse is docu-
mented.

     Each of the statutes defines conditions or circumstances that warrant
intervention. The statutes typically define abuse or mistreatment as a series
of broad categories, such as physical abuse, psychological or emotional
abuse, sexual abuse or exploitation, and fiduciary abuse or exploitation, as
well as neglect. However, not all states include all of these categories, and
others are sometimes added. For example, some states do not include
psychological abuse within the definition, while others add more specific
forms of mistreatment such as “unreasonable confinement” or “abandon-
ment.” Moreover, statutes sometimes distinguish between degrees of mis-
treatment according to the perpetrator’s culpability or state of mind; for
example, the law may distinguish among willful infliction of physical abuse,
negligently causing physical injury, and failure to prevent it.
     In addition to variations in the types of mistreatment included in the
statutory definition, the statutes also differ substantially in defining the
common categories. For example, the definition of emotional abuse in
several states includes “ridiculing or demeaning an infirm adult, making
derogatory remarks to an infirm adult or cursing or threatening to inflict
physical or emotional harm on an infirm adult,” whereas other states re-
quire proof of “extreme emotional distress or harm” (see Appendix B).
     These statutory variations in definitions and obligations create innu-
merable opportunities for confusion and lack of comparability, especially if
reported cases are being studied. When data are reported to some central
repository, unless the repository has imposed a specific definition for each
of the forms of abuse, the same statutory element will trigger reports in
different categories of cases in different states. Interpretation of combined
statistics is treacherous, even if the only objective is to compare trends
across states.


                          OUTLINE OF REPORT
    Keeping in mind the impediments to research identified in this chapter,
the panel decided to concentrate its attention on the tasks that are most
urgently needed to propel the field forward. Chapter 2 addresses the prob-
INTRODUCTION                                                            29

lem of inconsistencies in definition and measurement that have thus far
characterized research on elder mistreatment. Chapter 3 sketches a theo-
retical framework that may be useful in organizing research on the phe-
nomenology and etiology of elder mistreatment in different settings and
contexts. Chapter 4 addresses the challenge of measuring the occurrence of
elder mistreatment in the population, highlighting important epidemiologi-
cal considerations in elder mistreatment research. Chapter 5 summarizes
what is now known about risk factors for elder mistreatment and identifies
priorities for future research. Chapter 6 addresses research needed to im-
prove screening and case identification in clinical settings. Chapter 7 re-
views policies and programs aiming to prevent or respond to elder mistreat-
ment and identifies priorities for future research. Chapter 8 addresses
concerns about protecting human subjects in elder mistreatment research,
and Chapter 9 identifies some necessary conditions for moving the field
forward. The panel’s conclusions and recommendations are presented in
Table 1-1.
30                                                          ELDER MISTREATMENT

TABLE 1-1 Conclusions and Recommendations Regarding Elder
Mistreatment Research
                                                                             Page
Conclusion or Recommendation                                                 Number

Concepts, Definitions, and Guidelines for Measurement: Chapter 2

Basic research on the phenomenology of elder mistreatment is a critical
early step in the further development of the field.                          58

The development of widely accepted operational definitions and validated
and standardized measurement methods for the elements of elder
mistreatment is urgently needed to move the field forward.                   58

A Theoretical Model of Elder Mistreatment: Chapter 3

The panel recommends systematic, theory-driven longitudinal research,
both qualitative and quantitative, exploring the changing dynamics of
elder people’s relationships and the risk of mistreatment, as they are
affected by changing health status, social embeddedness, and caregiving
and living arrangements, in both domestic and institutional contexts.        70

The Occurrence of Elder Mistreatment: Chapter 4

Population-based surveys of elder mistreatment occurrence are feasible
and should be given a high priority by funding agencies. Preparatory
funding should be provided to develop and test measures for identifying
elder mistreatment.                                                          84

Funding agencies should give priority to the design and fielding of
national prevalence and incidence studies of elder mistreatment. These
studies should include both a large-scale, independent study of prevalence
and modular add-ons to other surveys of aging populations.                   85

In addition to improved household and geographically referent sampling
techniques, new methods of sampling and identifying elder mistreatment
victims in the community should be developed in order to improve the
validity and comprehensiveness of elder mistreatment occurrence
estimates.                                                                   86

Supplemental modules pertaining to elder mistreatment should be
included in existing comprehensive geographic health and social surveys,
including ongoing longitudinal studies of aging populations.                 86

Once the measurement issues have been satisfactorily addressed, a
comprehensive national prevalence study of elder mistreatment should
be undertaken.                                                               86
INTRODUCTION                                                                           31

TABLE 1-1 Continued
                                                                                Page
Conclusion or Recommendation                                                    Number



Research is needed on the phenomenology and clinical course of elder
mistreatment. The occurrence of elder mistreatment in institutional
settings, including hospitals, long-term care and assisted living situations,
is all but uncharacterized and needs new study sampling and detection
methods.                                                                        86, 87


Risk Factors for Elder Mistreatment: Chapter 5

Studies examining risk indicators and risk and protective factors for
different types of elder mistreatment are urgently needed. A particularly
critical need exists for such studies in institutional settings. Research on
risk and protective factors should take into consideration the clinical
course of elder mistreatment. Advances in measurement in risk and               101,
protective factor research are needed.                                          102


Screening and Case Identification in Clinical Settings: Chapter 6

Substantial research is needed to improve and develop new methods of
screening for possible elder mistreatment in a range of clinical settings.      120

Research is needed on the process of designating cases as incidents of
mistreatment in order to improve criteria, investigative methods,
decision-making processes, and decision outcomes.                               120

Research assessing the capacity of older persons with cognitive
impairments to provide accurate testimony is needed for improving the
accuracy of case identification, not only in clinical settings, but also in
legal settings, including prosecutorial decision making and formal
adjudication.                                                                   117

Research is needed to help illuminate the characteristics of common
injuries, such as their etiology, natural course, distribution, and severity
so that the process of identifying cases of elder mistreatment can
become more accurate and reliable.                                              120


Evaluating Interventions: Chapter 7

Research on the effects of elder mistreatment interventions is urgently
needed. Existing interventions to prevent or ameliorate elder
mistreatment should be evaluated, and agencies funding new intervention
programs should require and fund a scientifically adequate evaluation
as a component of each grant.                                                   139
32                                                           ELDER MISTREATMENT

TABLE 1-1 Continued
                                                                            Page
Conclusion or Recommendation                                                Number

The panel strongly recommends systematic studies of reporting practices
and the effects of reporting, taking maximum advantage of the
opportunity for comparisons of practices and outcomes in states with
and without mandated reporting.                                             124

Research is needed on the effectiveness of adult protective services
interventions, ideally in study designs that compare outcomes in cases
in which services were provided with those in which eligible recipients
declined offered services or other cases in which mistreatment of an
equivalent nature has been identified.                                      126

Prosecutorial response to elder mistreatment is an understudied area
that should receive heightened attention by the National Institute of
Justice and other funders of criminal justice research.                     129

Research about the use of civil justice interventions and their
effectiveness in preventing exploitation and other harm to elders should
be jointly sponsored by the National Institute of Justice and the
Administration on Aging.                                                    131

The panel strongly encourages government agencies and private
sponsors of elder mistreatment programs to give priority to interventions
that emphasize specialized professional training and interdisciplinary
collaboration. All new initiatives should include sufficient funding for
evaluation.                                                                 133


Research Ethics: Chapter 8

Investigators and institutional review boards (IRBs) need clearer
guidance (without rigid rules) concerning two issues that tend to recur
in elder mistreatment research: conditions under which research can
properly go forward with participants whose decisional capacity is
impaired, and the proper responses to evidence of mistreatment elicited
during the course of the study. The panel recommends that the
National Institute of Aging, in collaboration with the Office of Human
Research Protections and other sponsors of elder mistreatment research,
undertake a consensus project to develop ethical guidelines and provide
necessary clarification.                                                    144

Whenever feasible, investigators should consult representative members
of the populations being studied (elder persons and caregivers, nursing
home residents and staff, etc.) to ascertain their perspectives and
preferences regarding the proper responses to evidence of mistreatment
(and the related ethical issues raised by the proposed research), and
should take this information into account in developing the protocol.       144
INTRODUCTION                                                                         33

TABLE 1-1 Continued
                                                                               Page
Conclusion or Recommendation                                                   Number



Elder mistreatment reporting statutes should be amended to exempt
researchers from their mandatory requirements.                                 145

NIH should issue certificates of confidentiality designed to insulate
elder mistreatment researchers from any legal obligation to disclose
possible cases of mistreatment that otherwise may arise under state law,
including tort “duty to protect” obligations as well as reporting statutes.
Issuance of these certificates should be predicated on the assumption that
IRBs will carefully scrutinize the protocols to ensure that participants are
protected from harm and that, under appropriate circumstances, IRBs
will permit investigators to take voluntary steps to protect subjects in
danger.                                                                        145


Moving Forward: Chapter 9

An adequate long-term funding commitment to research on elder
mistreatment must be made by relevant federal, state, and private
agencies to support research careers and to develop the next generation
of investigators in the field.                                                 151
                                     2

            Concepts, Definitions, and
            Guidelines for Measurement




                       A     s noted in Chapter 1, one of the complexities of
research on elder mistreatment is that researchers have used varying defini-
tions of mistreatment. To some extent, this problem has been traceable to
statutory definitions that are highly variable and ambiguous. Because legal
definitions of abuse and neglect vary widely from state to state, efforts to
match research definitions in any given state with the statutory definitions
tend to undermine efforts to achieve comparability in research designs. In
addition, legal definitions ultimately depend on value judgments (initially
by clinicians and then by judges and juries) about the seriousness of the
perpetrator’s conduct; these value judgments are contingent social facts
that are themselves subject to empirical investigation.
    One of the most urgent challenges confronting the field is the need to
develop objective, uniform research definitions that are disentangled, to the
greatest feasible extent, from state statutory variations, as well as from the
contingent and subjective value judgments that inevitably characterize the
application of vague statutory language. At the same time, however, the
research definitions should also be logically connected to common statu-
tory concepts so that they can inform policy and practice. Accordingly, the
panel has reviewed state laws on elder abuse and neglect for the purpose of
identifying common patterns and providing a concrete context for thinking
about the core concepts and boundaries of the field of elder mistreatment.
(Appendix B summarizes state statutes as of December 2001.)
    Most state statutes include in some form (either under an umbrella
definition of “abuse” or as separately defined elements) at least the follow-

                                     34
CONCEPTS, DEFINITIONS, AND GUIDELINES FOR MEASUREMENT                     35

ing types of mistreatment: (1) physical acts causing pain or injury; (2)
conduct inflicting emotional distress or psychological harm; (3) sexual as-
sault; (4) financial exploitation; and (5) neglect. Some states also include
other conduct and conditions, such as “isolation” or “unreasonable con-
finement.” In most, but not all, states, abuse and neglect of elders fall
under the general adult protection statute, whereas some states have en-
acted specific provisions for elder protection. In almost all states, protec-
tive interventions are authorized or required only if the adults (or elders)
are mentally or physically impaired. In some contexts, the nature of the
relationship between the elder person and the alleged perpetrator also mat-
ters. On one hand, “neglect” (by definition) usually is associated exclu-
sively with persons who have a legal duty to provide care, but some states
direct or authorize intervention in cases involving adults found to be ne-
glecting their own basic needs (“self-neglect”). On the other hand, in most
states, anyone, even a stranger, can be found to have committed “abuse.”
The common statutory patterns in definitions of abuse, neglect, and finan-
cial exploitation are depicted in Figures 2-1, 2-2, and 2-3.


               TOWARD A SCIENTIFIC VOCABULARY
     The scientific vocabulary and measures that are used to study elder
abuse and neglect must diverge from the legal definitions in three important
respects: First, the conduct (by a perpetrator) and harms (to the elder)
being studied must be objectively ascertainable based on observation, record
review, or direct questioning of relevant parties. Second, although abuse
and neglect represent dichotomous (yes/no) judgments from a legal stand-
point, most of the underlying behaviors fall along a continuum and must be
analyzed empirically as dimensional variables in terms of frequency, inten-
sity, and severity (or riskiness)—even though the data may often be sub-
jected to dichotomous judgments. Third, the range of conduct being mea-
sured should be more inclusive than the behaviors or harmful consequences
that would indisputably amount to abuse or neglect under the applicable
law.
     In other words, researchers should investigate all the conduct and harms
that could amount to abuse or neglect if the perpetrator had the necessary
intention or culpability and if other statutory conditions are met. Some
subset of this all-encompassing category could be disaggregated in data
analysis to represent “core” cases of abuse or neglect, based on supposi-
tions about the presence of the necessary intention and other conditions.
The main point, however, is that the ideal empirical strategy would define
the category of interest broadly in terms of conduct and harmful conse-
quences, leaving further narrowing to the analytical and interpretive stages.
             Psychological Harm,                                                                                                          Intentional/Willful,
                                                                                                                                                                 36



             Sexual Abuse,                                                                              Acts/Omissions May Be             Reckless,
             Financial Exploitation,                       Act Only      OR         Act and Omission                                      and/or
             and/or                                                                                                                       Negligent
             Neglect

                     May be included under
                     umbrella term
                     “abuse” or
                     defined separately


             ABUSE / MISTREATMENT                     of                   VICTIM                  by                     ABUSER

             The infliction of physical                           Adult over 18 if mentally                  Any person     or      Caretaker
             pain/injury and/or                                   and/or physically impaired
             mental suffering/anguish


                     "Abuse" definition may include                           and/or




             Isolation                                           Any adult over 60 or 65, or                                     Individual or institution
                                                                                                                                 legally responsible for
             Deprivation of essential                            Mentally and/or physically                                      victim, and/or
             services, and/or                                    impaired adult over 60 or 65,
                                                                 or                                                              Individual who assumed
             Unreasonable                                                                                                        responsibility for victim
             confinement, and/or                                 Resident or patient of                                          by volunteering, contract,
                                                                 institution                                                     family relationship, and/or
             Abandonment, and/or                                                                                                 ties of friendship

             Inappropriate use of
             medications and/or restraints
             in the institutional setting




FIGURE 2-1   Summary of current statutory definitions of elder abuse.
               Self-Neglect::
               Failure of individual to provide
               essential services for self as
               result of mental or physical
               inability                                                                                              Acts/Omissions May Be             Intentional/Willful,
                                                                   Act Only         OR        Act and Omission                                          and/or
                                                                                                                                                        Negligent


                      May be included
                      within definition
                      of "Neglect"


               NEGLECT                                        of                         VICTIM                  by                 NEGLECTOR

               Failure to provide services                                    Adult over 18 if mentally                    Any person    or       Caretaker
               necessary to maintain physical                                 and/or physically impaired
               and mental health


                      "Neglect"                                "Neglect" may                      and/or
                      "may include                                exclude

               Failure to protect from abuse,
               exploitation, and/or
                                                                              Any adult over 60 or 65, or                                     Individual or institution
               Failure to exercise care that                                                                                                  legally responsible for
               reasonable caregiver would                                     Mentally and/or physically                                      victim, and/or
               exercise, and/or                                               impaired adult over 60 or 65,
                                                                                                                                              Individual who assumed
               Failure by health care institution                                     or                                                      responsibility for victim
               to provide adequate medical                                                                                                    by volunteering, contract,
               and/or personal care, and/or                                   Resident or patient of                                          family relationship, and/or
                                                                              institution                                                     ties of friendship
               Abandonment



                                                    Treatment in accordance with religious method of healing,
                                                    accidents, and/or therapeutic withholding of services
                                                                                                                                                                               37




FIGURE 2-2   Summary of current statutory definitions of elder neglect.
                                                                                                                                                    38




             FINANCIAL EXPLOITATION                         of             VICTIM                by                ABUSER

             Unjust, improper, and/or illegal                     Adult over 18 if mentally           Any person     or     Caretaker
             use of another's resources,                          and/or physically impaired
             property, and/or assets


                    "Exploitation" definition may include                     and/or




             Exploitation for one's own                          Any adult over 60 or 65, or                          Individual or institution
             profit or benefit of third                                                                               legally responsible for
             party, and/or                                       Mentally and/or physically                           victim, and/or
                                                                 impaired adult over 60 or 65,
             Exploitation in bad faith:                                                                               Individual who assumed
             person knew or should have                          or                                                   responsibility for victim
             known improper, and/or                                                                                   by volunteering, contract,
                                                                 Resident or patient of                               family relationship, and/or
             Exploitation results in                             institution                                          ties of friendship
             detriment of victim, and/or

             Exploitation involves
             coercion, enticement,
             intimidation, and/or undue
             influence



FIGURE 2-3   Summary of current statutory definitions of financial exploitation.
CONCEPTS, DEFINITIONS, AND GUIDELINES FOR MEASUREMENT                                           39

                               Elder Abuse and Neglect
     In order to avoid unnecessary confusion, the panel has developed a
research terminology to refer, descriptively, to the behaviors, relationships,
interactions, and conditions of scientific interest, reserving the terms
“abuse” and “neglect” to refer primarily to the legal category (recognizing
that the statutory definitions vary). Box 2-1 presents the panel’s glossary of
terms. The term being used in this report to encompass the conduct and
harmful consequences of scientific interest is “elder mistreatment.” Al-
though “mistreatment” is itself a value-laden term (and is used in some
state statutes), the panel has selected it because it appears to have been least
used as a statutory category.
     The panel’s definitions of elder mistreatment (and its constituent ele-
ments) have been guided entirely by scientific considerations. We have
asked: What definitions will be most useful for facilitating advances in
knowledge? It bears repeating that whether “mistreatment,” as the panel is
defining it, amounts to “abuse” or “neglect” in a legal sense depends on the
statutory definitions in a particular jurisdiction, the actor’s state of mind,
and other factors.


                                     BOX 2-1
                            Glossary of Research Terms

    Abuse. Conduct by responsible caregivers or other individuals that constitutes
    “abuse” under applicable state or federal law.

    Caregiver. A person who bears or has assumed responsibility for providing care
    or living assistance to an adult in need of such care or assistance.

    Harm. Injuries or unmet basic needs attributable to acts or omissions by others.

    Mistreatment. (a) Intentional actions that cause harm or create a serious risk of
    harm, whether or not intended, to a vulnerable elder by a caregiver or other person
    who stands in a trust relationship to the elder, or (b) failure by a caregiver to satisfy
    the elder’s basic needs or to protect the elder from harm.

    Neglect. An omission by responsible caregivers that constitutes “neglect” under
    applicable federal or state law.

    Trust Relationship. A caregiving relationship or other familial, social or profes-
    sional relationship where a person bears or has assumed responsibility for protect-
    ing the interests of the older person or where expectations of care or protection
    arise by law or social convention.

    Vulnerability. Financial, physical or emotional dependence on others or impaired
    capacity for self-care or self-protection.
40                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

                             Elder Mistreatment
     “Elder mistreatment” is defined in this report to refer to (a) intentional
actions that cause harm or create a serious risk of harm (whether or not
harm is intended) to a vulnerable elder by a caregiver or other person who
stands in a trust relationship to the elder or (b) failure by a caregiver to
satisfy the elder’s basic needs or to protect the elder from harm. “Mistreat-
ment” conveys two ideas: that some injury, deprivation, or dangerous
condition has occurred to the elder person and that someone else bears
responsibility for causing the condition or failing to prevent it.
     Two features of this definition merit emphasis. First, the term “mis-
treatment” is meant to exclude cases of so-called self-neglect—failure of an
older person to satisfy his or her own basic needs and to protect himself or
herself from harm. Self-neglect may often be a proper occasion for inter-
vention, at least of a temporary nature—for the purpose of determining
whether the elder has the capacities for self-care and, if appropriate, of
designating a caregiver, but the panel regards self-neglect as a separate
domain of elder protection, not as a component of mistreatment.
     Second, elder mistreatment, as defined by the panel, excludes victimiza-
tion of elders by strangers. In the panel’s view, ordinary predatory victim-
ization of elders merits empirical attention as a species of criminal behavior,
but it should not be regarded as a component of the distinct domain of elder
mistreatment. We say this because the nature of the relationship between
the elder and the perpetrator lies at the heart of common understanding of
the concept of mistreatment (and in most statutory definitions of abuse and
neglect) and therefore should guide the definitions used in empirical re-
search.


                 Caregiving and Other Trust Relationships
     Although we have excluded ordinary victimization by a stranger,
thereby narrowing the boundaries of the field, what types of relationships
are relevant? In the panel’s view, the range of relevant relationships de-
pends on whether the victim’s condition was caused by an intentional act
(typically causing an injury) or by a failure to satisfy a legal duty of care
(leading to unmet needs). If the elder has been injured—we refer here to
financial injury as well as physical and emotional injury—or otherwise put
at risk by the actor’s intentional conduct, the category of relevant relation-
ships includes not only caregivers, but also other family members or even
unrelated people (e.g., lawyers) who are aware of the elder’s vulnerability
and exploit it. The panel uses the phrase “trust relationships” to denote the
relevant relationships. Financial exploitation is illustrative: the conduct of
interest is exploitation by family members and others who may have as-
CONCEPTS, DEFINITIONS, AND GUIDELINES FOR MEASUREMENT                      41

sumed fiduciary obligations for elders with diminished capacity for finan-
cial decisions. As noted above, however, it does not include exploitation by
other predatory parties; these victimizations would amount to legal harms
(financial injuries) but not to mistreatment.
     By contrast, if the presenting condition relates to the elder’s unmet
needs, a de facto caregiving relationship (or expectation of care) is required
in order to preserve the boundary between neglect by responsible others
(mistreatment) and self-neglect. Professionals who are clinicians, such as
physicians, nurses, psychologists, or social workers, are de facto in trust
relationships with elders for whom they care. In this context, the relevant
relationships include only those people who have assumed the responsibil-
ity for caregiving or are expected to do so. Obviously this characterization
ultimately depends on highly contextual social facts that are not easily
ascertained in surveys or observations.


                   Vulnerability Associated with Aging
     Vulnerability is another core concept in elder mistreatment. Its impor-
tance can be seen by asking whether intimate partner violence constitutes
elder mistreatment simply because the victim is older than a designated age
(e.g., 65). In the panel’s view, the answer is “no” (although the issues may
overlap when the victim is older and vulnerable). A predicate feature of
elder mistreatment is that the victim has a diminished capacity for self-care
or self-protection. Thus, a chronic pattern of intimate partner violence that
has persisted into older age is not, by itself, “elder mistreatment.” Con-
versely, if violence against an intimate partner is initiated or becomes more
frequent or severe due to the older partner’s age-associated vulnerability,
then it is properly characterized as “elder mistreatment.”
     Although vulnerability is a core concept in the definition of elder mis-
treatment, the panel concluded that further specification would be prema-
ture at this time. Some aspects of vulnerability are indisputable, including
financial dependence and impairments of mobility (being wheelchair-bound)
or cognition (dementia). However, other factors that diminish capacity for
self-care or self-protection have not been well characterized. For this rea-
son, the panel regards the meaning of vulnerability as an empirical ques-
tion—as a referent for the cluster of clinical or psychosocial risk factors
associated with increased likelihood of mistreatment. For most research
purposes, vulnerability should not be used as a selection criterion; instead,
data bearing on vulnerability should be routinely collected and analyzed in
most studies of elder mistreatment.
     Finally, another boundary issue relates to the age cut off for being an
elder. This is a complicated issue. Conceptually speaking, vulnerability,
not age, is the determinative concept. There seems to be no important
42                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

difference (conceptually or morally) between caretaker neglect of a 35-year-
old with mental retardation and of a 65-year-old with dementia. So too
with financial exploitation and other forms of abuse. Setting children to
one side, the relevant population of vulnerable adults includes all persons
with impairments or disabilities, such as mental retardation or impairments
of capacity for mobility, associated with diminished capacity for self-pro-
tection. Not surprisingly, most adult protective services statutes include
elder abuse and neglect within the broader category of vulnerable adults.
Also, legislation designed to protect institutionalized persons (which in-
cludes psychiatric hospitals and mental retardation facilities as well as nurs-
ing homes) typically codify the right to be free of “abuse and neglect.”
     Having said this, however, the panel recognizes that the categorical
channeling of research funding (as well as protective legislation) along the
path of aging gives particular salience to vulnerability associated with aging
(as opposed to other conditions). The National Institute on Aging has
commissioned the panel’s study, and a special focus on elders establishes
the policy framework within which we are working. Accordingly, within
the larger domain of adult protection, this report gives special attention to
the aspects of research that focus on people who are vulnerable to mistreat-
ment due to aging. However, this does not mean that “vulnerability asso-
ciated with aging” should be defined categorically in terms of some particu-
lar age cutoff, such as 65. Even for legal purposes, the age of eligibility for
benefits tied to older age varies—e.g., 65 for social security, 60 for pro-
grams funded under the Older Americans Act, 60 or 65 under adult protec-
tive services statutes. (Interestingly, the threshold age of protection under
the Age Discrimination in Employment Act is 40.) For research purposes, a
category defined as persons 65 or over would be both overinclusive and
underinclusive—since many people over 65 are not vulnerable and some
younger than 65 are vulnerable due to aging (e.g., dementias). In sum, the
panel regards “older age” as one of the risk factors that should be explored
empirically under the rubric of “vulnerability associated with aging.” As
the field of elder mistreatment develops, surveillance and research must
attend specifically to age as well as other indicators of vulnerability. (The
panel’s conceptual vocabulary is depicted in Figures 2-4 and 2-5.)


                   GUIDELINES FOR MEASURMENT
     In science, good measurement has several prerequisites. The first is a
concept of what is being measured. In this case the object of measurement
is the occurrence of elder mistreatment using the vocabulary and definitions
presented above. The second prerequisite is an operational definition of the
concept being explored so that it is objectively ascertainable in the field.
Operational definitions in the domain of elder mistreatment are compli-
CONCEPTS, DEFINITIONS, AND GUIDELINES FOR MEASUREMENT                        43

                   Elder Mistreatment and Adjacent
                   Domains of Research and Policy

          When do harmful acts or omissions lie within the
                 domain of elder mistreatment?




                                 Vulnerability




                              C                B
                                       A
                                                 Trust
                  Older Age
                                       D         Relationship




          A = core area of elder mistreatment


          Adjacent domains of research and policy interest:

           B = mistreatment of adults with disabilities
          C = "self-neglect" by elderly people; victimization by strangers

          D = spouse or intimate partner discord or violence involving an
          elderly partner

FIGURE 2-4    Elder mistreatment and adjacent domains of research and policy.



cated, in part because the relevant concepts are poorly developed, and in
part because researchers’ aims vary widely across studies. Operation-
alization answers questions such as: “How do we measure this or that
aspect of mistreatment?” or “How will we know whether we should count
this as a case of mistreatment?” Ideally, operationalization leads to the
development of a set of criteria for answering this question and a process by
which these criteria can be applied in the field—the measurement method.
44                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

        C
        Reported
        Conduct        Intentional acts                  Failure to provide care

        or

        Presenting     Injury                            Unmet [basic] needs
        Condition

        V
        Vulnerability Impairment of capacity for self
                                                  - -protection or self-care
                                                                    -
        Associated
        with Aging

        R
                     Person in trust                     Caregiver
        Relationship relationship

        LD
        Legal         "Abuse"                            "Neglect"
        Definition    (depends on definitions            (depends on definition
                      under applicable law)              under applicable law)

FIGURE 2-5    Basic elements of elder mistreatment.

  Explanation
  C + V + R represent a sequential analysis of the necessary elements of elder
  mistreaatment (conduct by people in caregiver roles or other trust relation-
  ships that injures a vulnerable elder, deprives the elder of basic needs, or
  exposes the elder to risks of injury or deprivation); each of these elements can
  be operationalized descriptively for research purposes.

  C includes all injuries or threats to survival or health, by whomever caused,
  including self-inflicted injury or “self-neglect” and predatory conduct by
  strangers.

  V excludes cases of “ordinary” victimization and self-injurious behavior not
  involving vulnerability associated with aging.

  R excludes self-inflicted injury and self-neglect and predatory conduct by
  strangers.

  LD represents the subset of cases defined by C+V+R that have been included
  in the definition of “abuse” or “neglect” under applicable state laws and
  practices. (A particular statute may also include cases that do not have all of
  these elements.)
CONCEPTS, DEFINITIONS, AND GUIDELINES FOR MEASUREMENT                         45

Given the complexity of the definition of mistreatment, its operational-
ization is best approached in a stepwise fashion, with each step addressing
a different aspect of the concept.
     The next prerequisite involves the standardization of measures prior to
their use in research. In many research settings, such as population surveys,
it will be sufficient for the researchers to describe the conduct and other
variables that have been measured in a way that reflects the relevant dimen-
sions of mistreatment. As researchers continue the iterative process of
conceptualizing and operationalizing the measures, a consensus will gradu-
ally emerge regarding the relevance and significance of the measures being
used in the field for different aspects of mistreatment and its correlates and
outcomes. In some clinical research contexts, however, it will be necessary
for researchers to classify whether or not the data represent a “case” of
mistreatment. Under optimal circumstances, there would be a method of
measurement to definitively assess the presence or absence of elder mis-
treatment in such cases. Such a “gold standard” could be used to judge the
value of other measures as well as to definitively determine the presence or
absence of mistreatment for research purposes. Given the nature of the
object of measurement, such a standard is not possible in the elder mistreat-
ment field. There are two basic problems—contested facts and contested
values. Irrespective of research methodology, uncertainties will arise re-
garding the conduct of the alleged perpetrator and the effects on the elder.
Also, as already indicated, characterization of particular conduct as mis-
treatment requires value judgments, contestable at the margin if not at the
core.
     Using the example of other fields confronted with a similar problem, a
“LEAD standard” (longitudinal, experts, all data) could be developed to
serve in the place of a gold standard (Spitzer, 1983). A LEAD standard
would use longitudinal observation, all relevant data, and the review by
experts in the field to determine the presence or absence of mistreatment. A
LEAD methodology typically involves two components. The first compo-
nent is collection of data on the case that is to be classified (as mistreated or
not mistreated). An expert in the area who investigates the case thoroughly
collects the data. The investigation might include taking history from
several sources, interviewing the person who may have been mistreated,
interviewing the possible perpetrator(s), as well as reviewing medical and
other pertinent records. The data collection focuses, as much as possible,
on whatever longitudinal information is available on the case.
     The second component of the methodology involves evaluation of the
data by a panel of experts, who are asked to make a collective judgment
about whether or not the case meets an a priori definition of mistreatment
or a specific type of mistreatment. The definition is made available to the
panel, often in the form of operational criteria. The panel, typically small—
46                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

5–7 members—for the sake of efficiency, includes interdisciplinary repre-
sentation from professional backgrounds with expertise in the area of mis-
treatment. The expert who collected the data presents each case verbally
and in the form of a structured case summary.
     The panel then deliberates case-by-case to decide if a specific case meets
the a priori definition. The decisions the panel makes in each case, such as
judgments about which specific examples meet the definition and which do
not, are recorded and eventually summarized in a workbook/minutes book
reflecting the consensus process as applied to real cases. The latter can then
be used to improve upon the definition, as precedent for future panels, or to
train professionals in the recognition of elder mistreatment. This should be
a process that (almost) everyone would agree is able to classify correctly
individuals as mistreated or not mistreated without worrying about the
resources or cost needed to make the determination. Put another way, if
resources were not an issue, what would be done to decide if someone has
been mistreated or not? Once a LEAD standard is in place, then several
potential methods of determining mistreatment can be tested against this
standard. And the LEAD method itself can be used in the context of
research to definitively assess the presence or absence of elder mistreatment.
Such an approach is already under way in the work of Fulmer and Wetle
(1986).
     The next step is the development of the measure. This involves decid-
ing on the specific purpose of the measure and the measurement method,
followed by an assessment of its reliability and validity. Measures may
have different purposes, such as to ascertain occurrence of mistreatment in
the population for research purposes or for surveillance, to assess the risk of
mistreatment for early intervention, to screen for mistreatment in different
settings (e.g., emergency department, long-term care), to determine whether
mistreatment occurred in a given circumstance, to differentiate different
types of mistreatment (e.g., physical or financial), to quantify the severity of
mistreatment, and so forth. Clearly, different measures will need to be
developed for use in these different research contexts.
     Similarly, measures are likely to vary according to the method used to
elicit the data. These include self-report, proxy or informant report, direct
examination of the elder’s physical and/or mental state, clinical observa-
tion, or a composite of these. The choice of assessment method will depend
on the purpose of the measure, the risks of error associated with each
method, the tolerance for error in measurement, and the research resources
available.
     The measure should be both reliable and valid. Reliability assesses how
much agreement there is if different people are conducting the measurement
(interobserver) or if a measure is applied at different points in time (test-
retest). High interobserver reliability should be pursued. Test-retest reli-
CONCEPTS, DEFINITIONS, AND GUIDELINES FOR MEASUREMENT                       47

ability should also be pursued for all measures; short time intervals of test-
retest are optimal, since the occurrence of mistreatment is transient in some
cases.
     Validity assesses how accurate a measure is of what we want it to
measure, in this case some aspect of mistreatment. There are several types
of validity: content, criterion, predictive, and construct validity. Content
validity is an assessment of the measurement method’s ability to measure
mistreatment using logic and special expertise, typically by expert opinion.
Criterion validity assesses the measure against a widely agreed-upon stan-
dard, in this case a LEAD standard. Predictive validity assesses the ability
of the measure to make predictions about the future, such as predicting
response to interventions or the course of mistreatment. Finally, any re-
search evidence that tends to illuminate exactly what the instrument mea-
sures adds to its construct validity.
     In sum, research measurement in the field of elder mistreatment is
complicated for several reasons. First, several elements require measure-
ment. Second, observations necessary to make a determination of mistreat-
ment are usually not directly available to the researcher and must be in-
ferred indirectly. Third, even with the necessary observations available, a
determination of mistreatment is not immediately apparent but rather re-
quires human judgment to assess whether these observations meet (a priori)
definitions (operational criteria) of mistreatment derived from common
sense, consensus, or law. Fourth, the definitions against which the observa-
tions are assessed appear to be variable in research conducted thus far.
These issues greatly limit the ability of researchers to develop measurement
tools that meet high standards of reliability and validity.

         OPERATIONALIZING THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS
     In the context of elder mistreatment, several variables are a target of
measurement. These are listed in Box 2-2.
     The items in this box merit initial comment prior to later detailed
discussion. With regard to the first item, while the issue of who is an older
person has no definitive answer for all purposes, the demographic category
of interest needs to be defined explicitly for the purposes of research. The
second item is the existence of a trust relationship between an elder and
another person. As indicated above, the concept of elder mistreatment is
predicated on the existence of such a relationship. Thus, a definition for
what constitutes a trust relationship is needed. For both these items,
operationalization is straightforward in the sense that an a priori definition,
whatever its strengths and weaknesses, can be applied in the process of
research so that a particular situation can be assessed against that definition
(e.g., “Does this particular person meet the definition of being an older
48                                                              ELDER MISTREATMENT



                                  BOX 2-2
                Variables Requiring Operational Definition in
                   Research Involving Elder Mistreatment

     1. Who is an older person?
     2. What constitutes a trust relationship between an older and another person?
     3. What is the relevant conduct of the “other” person in the trust relationship?
     4. What harms has the older person experienced (or what dangers were created
     as a result of the conduct of the person in the trust relationship)?
     5. Does this combination of conduct and harm constitute mistreatment, as that
     term has been defined in the study?
     6. What are the risk and protective factors associated with the occurrence of mis-
     treatment? Specifically, what aspects of the older person’s condition make him or
     her more or less vulnerable to mistreatment?
     7. What are the outcomes of mistreatment or of interventions aiming to prevent it?




person?” and “Does the relationship meet the definition of being a trust
relationship?”)
     It is necessary to measure the relevant conduct (what was done or not
done) of the other person, to assess whether or not the elder has been
harmed, and, if so, to determine whether what the other person has done or
not done has caused the harm. The definition of the relevant conduct and
harm is a complex undertaking in that it is not always possible to anticipate
in advance all conduct and consequences that might be of interest. Further-
more, in the process of assessment while in the field, it is highly unlikely
that the conduct in question will be directly observable to those conducting
the research and is therefore likely to be evaluated indirectly. This is often
true for harms as well. Thus an operational definition of conduct and harm
should contain a general description of the kinds of conduct and conse-
quences that may be of interest as well as a description of the process used
to determine the occurrence of relevant conduct and harms, constructed so
that they can be assessed both directly and indirectly.
     Determining whether a particular conduct caused a particular harm
will not be necessary in most studies, especially those using survey methods.
However, this task may be necessary in some studies, especially those relat-
ing to the factors that differentiate, clinically, between inadvertent injuries
and intentional ones (see Chapter 6.). In some cases, when direct observa-
tion is available, it is possible to state unequivocally that a specific conduct
caused the injury. For example, if a caregiver hits an elder on her upper
right arm and there is a bruise where there the elder was struck, causality
for the bruise is clear. However, if the elder also is anxious and scared,
under what circumstances can one conclude that the striking of the arm
caused these psychological consequences? Furthermore, if the elder has
CONCEPTS, DEFINITIONS, AND GUIDELINES FOR MEASUREMENT                       49

bruises elsewhere on her body, when might it be concluded that the same
caregiver striking her at other times caused these other bruises? As should
be apparent, the causal inference connecting conduct to consequences in
many instances necessitates a judgment on the part of the researcher. Thus,
for some studies, the researcher may have to specify an operational defini-
tion of causality and a process by which the determination of causality is
made.
     The next item in the box deals with the evaluation of information from
the previous items in judging whether or not the combination of conduct
and harm constitutes mistreatment. This requires operational definitions of
the types of mistreatment against which the specific circumstances can be
assessed. The panel encourages researchers to be as specific as possible in
identifying which combinations of conduct and harm are being defined as
mistreatment for purposes of the study. It may be helpful to define the
category of mistreatment separately for (1) physical mistreatment, (2) sexual
mistreatment, (3) emotional mistreatment (including isolation), (4) finan-
cial exploitation, and (5) failure to provide needed care, including abandon-
ment.
     As explained earlier, the panel recommends that researchers try to
avoid stand-alone, unmodified use of the terms “abuse” and “neglect”
because these terms require legal interpretations and community value judg-
ments that inevitably vary across states and localities. In addition, it should
be recognized that whether a case is found by the applicable authorities to
constitute abuse or neglect also depends on the purpose of the intervention
in a particular case and other aspects of the social context. In some situa-
tions, for example, the question being asked is whether an intervention or
treatment might be implemented to help the elder. In other situations,
however, a determination of abuse or neglect might lead to criminal pros-
ecution of the perpetrator. These determinations are all rooted in value
judgments made initially by the examining clinicians and subsequently by
public officials and courts. These judgments are themselves subject to
empirical study. In such investigations, what must be defined and mea-
sured are the variety of possible clinical, social, and legal responses that
might be made to particular cases. If this type of research were added to the
box, the question of interest would be “Was this combination of conduct
and harm characterized as ‘abuse’ or ‘neglect’ by the relevant decision-
makers?”
     The sixth element in the box involves the operationalization and mea-
surement of factors that increase or decrease the likelihood of elder mis-
treatment. Measurement of risk and protective factors is as important as
measurement for mistreatment itself. Risk factors are factors that increase
the probability of mistreatment, while protective factors are ones that de-
crease its probability. Their measurement is critical from the public health
50                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

point of view for several reasons. Their identification is crucial to the
detection of who is at risk for mistreatment so that preventive interventions
can be applied. As well, their identification promotes understanding of the
mechanisms leading to mistreatment. Because vulnerabilities associated
with aging (and with disabilities) are of special concern in the fields of elder
mistreatment and adult protective services, these risk factors require careful
attention. (Research on risk and protective factors is discussed in Chapter
5.)
     The final element in the box relates to the outcomes and consequences
of mistreatment. Mistreatment has been associated with a series of conse-
quences and adverse outcomes. For example, mistreatment can cause physi-
cal and mental morbidity that is at times sustained. It can lead to serious
financial strain. As well, social isolation, loss of dignity, impaired quality
of life can result. Research on the consequences of mistreatment is critical
to understanding its individual and societal impact and to targeting and
assessing the benefit of interventions. (A theoretical model linking mis-
treatment to its outcomes is discussed in Chapter 3.)
     With this overview in mind, the discussion now turns specifically to the
measurement of several of the elements involved in research on mistreat-
ment as identified in Box 2-2.


                                Older Person
    If an age cutoff is to be used, then the operationalization and measure-
ment of who is an older person are straightforward and merit no further
discussion. If, however, the definition is broadened to include other groups
of vulnerable adults, operational definitions and specific measurement meth-
ods may be needed. For example, if the definition is broadened to include
“adults with developmental disabilities,” or “adults with mental illness,” or
“adults with physical disabilities,” then a definition of each of these terms is
necessary for research to go forward, as is a method of determining whether
a specific individual meets the definition. It seems fair to assume that
definitions and measurements for various types of disabilities exist in the
relevant fields and can be imported with appropriate modification to re-
search on elder mistreatment.
    The panel favors specific definitions of disability if the population be-
ing studied is chosen on this basis, rather than use of a generic and vague
category of all “vulnerable adults.” Objective criteria of inclusion, such as
cognitive impairment or frailty or disability impairing locomotion, should
be used. However, if the study population is defined by age (e.g., everyone
over 18 or 40 or 55, etc)., then the elements of vulnerability can be defined
empirically according to the personal characteristics that emerge as risk
factors for mistreatment.
CONCEPTS, DEFINITIONS, AND GUIDELINES FOR MEASUREMENT                        51

                             Trust Relationship
     A trust relationship is at the center of research in elder mistreatment. In
the simplest terms, such a relationship exists when one party is charged
with, or has assumed, the responsibility for caring for or protecting the
interests of the older person, or when the relationship (in its social context)
creates the expectation of care or protection. There are therefore at least
two participants in such a relationship, the elder and the person—or per-
sons—responsible for care or protection or expected to provide care or
protection for the elder. Such a relationship may arise formally or infor-
mally and may be voluntarily undertaken or imposed by operation of law
or social custom.
     For example, the relationship may arise from a formal guardianship or
a durable power of attorney in which the trusted person agreed to serve in
that role in the event of the elder’s incapacitation. Even in the absence of
any formal designations, the relationship may arise out of kinship or friend-
ship or professional roles. For example, a relative, caregiver, or other
person may find himself or herself in the position of making health care or
living decisions for the elder without any formal agreement or designation.
Furthermore, someone may take on the responsibility to assist the older
person in financial matters, such as an accountant, financial adviser, or
friend with special knowledge in this area. Under certain circumstances,
the existence of a trust relationship may be predicated on the fact that the
other person is a health care professional who has taken on the care of the
elder, as would happen in a nursing home, assisted living, or hospital with
a nursing aide or licensed professional.
     Different types of relationships may have different bearings on elder
mistreatment, depending on the type of mistreatment. The threshold of
involvement that constitutes a trust relationship may vary for physical
mistreatment, emotional mistreatment, financial exploitation, or failure to
provide needed care. For example, failure to provide needed care (neglect)
depends on the existence of a de facto caregiving relationship and therefore
would require a narrower range of relationships than the other categories
of mistreatment. For example, any family member would be in a trust
relationship for purposes of the basic expectation that they will not exploit
or harm the vulnerable elder person. However, a family relationship clearly
will not always amount to a relationship sufficient to give rise to a caregiver
obligation; this is why the panel has distinguished between these two con-
cepts and has defined trust relationships as a broad category that includes,
but is not limited to, caregivers.
     In some circumstances, of course, existence of a trust relationship is
unambiguous and harm caused by the other person would always consti-
tute mistreatment. These include legal guardians and professionals who
52                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

enter into formal professional relationships with an older person. The case
for a legal guardian should be obvious. Similarly, paid professionals,
whether they be clinicians, attorneys, financial advisers, or accountants,
enter into trust relationships by virtue of their professional activities. It
should be apparent that relationships with paid professionals in all health
care settings, such as hospitals, nursing homes, assisted living homes, adult
day care programs, and the like, enter into trust relationships when they
come into contact with older people. This includes not only licensed pro-
fessionals such as doctors or nurses but also personal care workers (nursing
aides), janitorial staff, escort staff, etc.
     In other circumstances, whether a particular relationship amounts to a
trust relationship for purposes of elder mistreatment research may be un-
clear. In the first instance, researchers should make every effort to deter-
mine the point of view of the older person regarding their trust relation-
ships. In some situations, this may be determinative. However, in many
situations, the elder person’s point of view will not be ascertainable or will
be superseded by social conventions or legal duties. For example, the older
person may be suspicious of, and have no expectation of protection from, a
home health care aide who has assumed a caregiving obligation. Con-
versely, the older person may develop a trusting relationship with a door-
to-door vacuum cleaner salesman who, by law and social convention, bears
no obligation to protect the older person’s interests. Accordingly, applying
the concept ultimately requires objective assessment and judgment.
     In sum, empirical knowledge is lacking about the kinds of trust rela-
tionships that older persons enter into, the other parties involved in these
relationships, the foundations of these relationships, and their association
with different types of mistreatment. Therefore, an early priority of re-
search in the field ought to be the conceptual and empirical development of
different operational definitions of trust relationships.


          Conduct of the Other Person in the Trust Relationship
     The relevant conduct of the other party that may be of interest includes
direct physical contact (hitting, pushing, shoving, etc.), verbal mistreatment
(yelling, threatening verbally, criticism, etc.), placing restrictions on the
older person (isolating to a room, unnecessary use of physical or chemical
restraints), social embarrassment (berating the elder in public), depriving
the older person of material possessions (restricting access to money, steal-
ing from the elder, etc.), not providing necessary care (e.g., not providing
medications, bathing infrequently, feeding a limited diet), and many more.
The challenge for researchers is to define the conduct with maximum pos-
sible specificity to facilitate analysis and interpretation. Whether any such
conduct amounts to mistreatment requires a value judgment based on con-
CONCEPTS, DEFINITIONS, AND GUIDELINES FOR MEASUREMENT                       53

text. For example, restricting access to money may be entirely appropriate
conduct in caring for a person with dementia. (See further discussion of
this point in the section on “mistreatment” below.) As noted earlier in this
chapter, however, the most sensible strategy for research is to define the
category overinclusively (with reference to the expected definition of mis-
treatment) for purposes of data collection and measurement and to refine it
thereafter in analysis and interpretation.
     Measurement of conduct is subject to a number of significant method-
ological limitations. Briefly, much of this conduct is not observed directly
and relies for its detection on report by the elder, by the other party in the
trust relationship—who may be the perpetrator of mistreatment— or by a
third party, such as a colleague or supervisor of the other party in an
institutional setting. Indeed, in the absence of direct observation, conduct
is harder to assess than harm, since it may not leave evidence in the form of
readily observable physical or emotional consequences, since it may be
forgotten by the elder if she is cognitively impaired, since the older person
may be reluctant to report the occurrence of such conduct, or since the
other person may not report it out of conflict of interest.
     The investigator is faced with the difficult task of detecting a “latent
variable” requiring a research methodology that optimally employs several
modalities of assessment and takes repeated observation. As with assess-
ment of harm, there is a dearth of basic descriptive studies of conduct
involved and of measurement methods.


                                    Harm
     As already noted, mistreatment (under any consensus definition) will
include some types of conduct that have not actually caused harm—per-
haps because harm was not intended or because the conduct creates an
unacceptable risk of harm. However, many types of mistreatment do in-
volve actual injury or harm, most notably physical assault and financial
mistreatment (loss of property). To the extent that the definition includes
harm, the measure of harm must be operationalized and measured.
     The importance of measuring harm varies according to the type of
research being conducted. For example, survey research and other studies
in nonclinical settings (or not using clinical or legal records) are likely to
focus mainly on the possible perpetrator’s conduct; the presence of harm is
likely to be ascertained on the basis of a few specific indicators (e.g., “Were
you hurt?” “Did you have to go to the hospital?” “Did you lose any
money?”) However, in the context of research in clinical settings, such as
identification of forensic markers for mistreatment, or development of im-
proved screening tools, the assessment of harm may be a particularly im-
portant element of the study.
54                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

     Pertinent types of harm to older persons include physical injury, emo-
tional injury, and financial harm. Physical harm is the most straightfor-
ward, since its presence typically can be assessed reliably through examina-
tion, through laboratory tests (e.g., X-rays), or upon forensic assessment.
Examples of physical harm include lacerations, burns, fractures, bruises,
malnutrition, and others (Dyer et al., in this volume). Similarly, financial
harm can typically be assessed reliably if access to the older person’s finan-
cial records is available. Emotional harm is more difficult to assess. This
may take on the form of mental distress and other psychological responses,
post-traumatic symptomatology (social withdrawal, reexperiencing trau-
matic events, trouble sleeping or eating, etc.), or the onset (at times recur-
rence) of a psychiatric disorder, such as major depression, post-traumatic
stress disorder, panic disorder, agoraphobia, among others. Measurement
of harm must be able to determine the presence or absence of different
consequences in the various domains above. Since many harms may not be
anticipated prior to the initiation of the research, the measurement method
must be general and flexible so as to detect a wide range of consequences
that may be specific to the specific elder-trust relationship, and to the
setting involved (home, hospital, long-term care etc.). The measurement
method must also evaluate temporal aspects of the consequences (onset,
frequency, duration) and quantify the severity of these consequences.
     A key methodological issue in the measurement of consequences is that
some of the harms involved are not always accessible to direct measure-
ment. This is true for several reasons. First, in many cases, harms are
transient and remit by the time an assessment occurs, as in the case of a
bruise or a laceration. Second, many older persons who are mistreated are
cognitively impaired and cannot recall past harms. Third, many older
people are reluctant to report conduct of others who may have harmed
them or that may constitute mistreatment out of embarrassment or for
other reasons. Fourth, often the only other source of information about
past harms may be the other person in the trust relationship, who has a
conflict of interest regarding disclosure of the harm. Therefore, the best a
researcher can do, as is customary when latent variables are being investi-
gated, is to employ methods of assessment that are multimodal (e.g., self-
report, observer report, data review, direct examination, laboratory stud-
ies, forensic assessment) and that are repeated with sufficient frequency to
minimize the likelihood that relevant consequences are missed. The corol-
lary to this is that measurement methods should include checks and bal-
ances so that false positives are minimized as well.
     In general, methods to assess the presence or absence of physical injury,
emotional disturbance, or financial injury are available and have been
adapted to the elder mistreatment context. These methods generally are
able to evaluate the presence or absence of injury (harm) and are also able
CONCEPTS, DEFINITIONS, AND GUIDELINES FOR MEASUREMENT                     55

to approach its temporal aspects and severity. The vast majority of mea-
sures have focused on the determination of whether elder mistreatment has
occurred using a wide range of methods and definitions. Many studies have
assessed the occurrence of mistreatment by review of protective agency
records, study of sentinel reports (reports of professionals serving older
adults), or criminal justice system statistics. These have used typically
unstandardized or vague definitions of abuse and neglect, many based on
the wording of state statutes, and have significant methodological weak-
ness.
     A few researchers have tackled the problem directly, but they have used
definitions or measures that have varied from study to study. In some
cases, methods have been developed to assess the occurrence of elder abuse
using telephone or in-person interviews of family members or proxies or
direct assessments of samples of older adults. However, there is a dearth of
such measures, and most existing measures have had limited assessment of
their measurement characteristics, reliability, or validity. Furthermore, the
measures used have almost always been direct adaptations of measures
intended for other purposes or for other settings (e.g., the Conflict Tactics
Scale was intended to measure interpersonal violence for married couples
and was modified by Pillemer and Finkelhor to assess abuse of older people
by their caregivers). As well, existing measures are inadequately differenti-
ated or specialized. They do not, for example, distinguish clearly the types
of harm they are measuring (physical, emotional, etc.) or differentiate the
measures according to whether they are intended to screen for harm, define
its occurrence, or measure its severity.
     The elder mistreatment field is lacking in descriptive methodological
research on how to measure consequences that are related to mistreatment.
As Dyer et al. (this volume) note, no studies have carefully described the
different types of harms that mistreated older persons may suffer, the inter-
relationship of the different harms (e.g., relationship of physical to emo-
tional to financial), the severity of harms, their characteristics, and their
clinical course. In addition, few studies have compared different approaches
to the measurement of harms. The greatest gap relates to psychological
consequences of elder mistreatment. This sort of information is key to the
ability to develop measures that are methodologically sound. Basic meth-
odological research should also be an early priority in the field.


                               Mistreatment
     Whether certain facts, collected using the methods discussed so far in
this chapter, constitute mistreatment is a matter of definition and judgment.
The researcher’s main goal should be to make the process as transparent as
possible. The facts, collected as above, must be assessed against an a priori
56                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

TABLE 2-1 Cross-Tabulation of Conducts and Harms
                  Illustrative Conduct by Other Party

                                                   Failed to     Gave Wrong
Harm to           None or Hit  Pushed              Feed a        Medication      Locked
Older Person      Unknown Once Downstairs          Meal          Dose            in Room

None

Bruise

Fracture

Depression

Dehydration

Hospital
admission

NOTE: Intersecting sets may or may not constitute mistreatment depending on the definition
used in the study.



definition. (The panel’s preferred definition is set forth above.) Much of
the time, the facts fit the definition with little doubt. In other cases, whether
the facts should be characterized as mistreatment requires judgment. Thus
the researcher must specify a process for making this determination.
     This process works best if it has at least two characteristics. The first is
a set of rules or guidelines specifying whether anticipated combinations of
circumstances and conduct will constitute one form or another of mistreat-
ment if detected in the field. A different cross-tabulation of conducts and
harms is necessary for each type of mistreatment. This is illustrated in
Table 2-1.
     This approach illustrates several issues. While it is not possible to
anticipate all combinations of conduct and harms that could be encoun-
tered, prior consideration of the types of issues that will come up in the
course of the research will help standardize decisions in the conduct of the
study. Also, the frequency of harms and conducts must be taken into
account in the table. For example, a single instance of pushing an older
person down the stairs may constitute mistreatment regardless of whether
an injury occurs, whereas forgetting to feed her a meal now and then may
not. Furthermore, the absence of both specific conduct and specific harms
may, under certain circumstances, constitute mistreatment.
     For example, as already mentioned, specific harms that could be due
only to mistreatment (such as certain types of fractures) might be classified
CONCEPTS, DEFINITIONS, AND GUIDELINES FOR MEASUREMENT                          57

as mistreatment even if the relevant conduct were not detected. But con-
duct that has not resulted in any apparent harm may also at times be
properly characterized as mistreatment. If a trusted person attempts to
push an older person down the stairs but fails to succeed, thus causing no
obvious harm, most would agree that this is physical mistreatment. What
distinguishes this situation is the intent of the trusted person, so that if there
is clear intent to harm, mistreatment may be present even if the harm did
not occur.
     While intent is important in limited circumstances, it should be kept in
mind that intent to harm, which is very hard to determine (even in a
courtroom, much less for research purposes), is not a necessary element of
the definition of mistreatment, as defined in this report. Of course, when
there is intent to harm that can be determined unequivocally, then in all
likelihood mistreatment has occurred. While it would be interesting to
study the relationship between intent of the trusted person and conduct or
harms that constitute mistreatment (and that are characterized as neglect
and abuse by social authorities) this is not a core aspect of the measurement
of mistreatment.
     An important caveat should be added at this point. One of the difficul-
ties in elder mistreatment research so far has been the use of overly inclusive
definitions of what constitutes mistreatment. Some writers have included
the entire range of harms and conducts in Table 2-1 as mistreatment,
including, in some cases, “social embarrassment” that may have been tran-
sient, or minor physical injuries that were clearly an accident. It is impor-
tant for researchers to focus their attention on serious forms of mistreat-
ment and not to define “normal” negative human interactions as
pathological. The purpose of the cross tabulation is not to lay out all harms
and consequences involved in interactions between an older person and
another in a trust relationship; rather it is to limit the definition of elder
mistreatment to a specific number of intersecting sets that have been de-
fined by the researcher as plausible forms of mistreatment.
     The second part of the assessment of mistreatment is the specification
of a process used to apply the definition and guidelines to all cases under
study. This process has as its starting point the facts in each case, the
definitions of mistreatment being employed in the study, and the rules/
guidelines derived from cross-tabulation of anticipated examples. This
information is reviewed by designated individuals using a specified process.
Typically, a trained expert looks at each case and decides the simple ones.
A consensus panel then reviews the more complex cases, plus a sampling of
the simpler ones classified by the individual reviewers. It bears emphasis
that this classification is needed only if a dichotomous classification is
required by the goals of a particular study. As already noted, the panel
encourages study of a broad range of conducts and harms beyond those
58                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

that could be classified as cases of mistreatment. The presence (or absence)
of some of these might be predictive of the onset of mistreatment in the
future. Also, even though they may not be mistreatment, some of these
could affect the quality of life of the older person. Finally, these may be of
interest to social scientists studying the relationship between conduct and
consequence in older persons and their caregivers.


                        Risk and Protective Factors
     A major purpose of research in elder mistreatment is to understand its
causes so that it can be prevented, treated, or managed effectively. This line
of inquiry typically begins with the study of factors that increase (risk) or
decrease (protective) the probability that mistreatment will occur. As dis-
cussed earlier, it is the panel’s view that one of the crucial risk factors
involved is the vulnerability of the elder person. More research is needed
on risk factors, including vulnerability, and protective factors for mistreat-
ment. This issue is of such significance to the field that Chapter 5 has been
devoted to it.


                              CONCLUSIONS
     1. Further basic research on the phenomenology of elder mistreatment
is a critical early step in the further development of the field. Such research
will lead to a much better understanding of the key elements of elder
mistreatment (see Box 2-1), which in turn will facilitate the development of
broadly accepted operational definitions and the development of research
and clinical measures for these phenomena. Examples of such research
include studies of: (1) the kinds of trust relationships that older persons
enter into, the other parties involved in these relationships, the foundations
of these relationships, and their association with different types of mistreat-
ment; (2) the different types of harms that mistreated older persons may
suffer, the interrelationship of the different harms (e.g., relationship of
physical to emotional to financial), the severity of harms, their temporal
characteristics, and their clinical course; (3) the injurious conduct or omis-
sions of other parties in trust relationships, how they manifest themselves,
and their clinical course; (4) the psychological effects of mistreatment, in-
cluding types of psychological harm, their presentation, and their clinical
course; and (5) the circumstances under which harm is most likely to have
been caused by the acts or omissions of another person.
     2. The development of widely accepted operational definitions and
validated and standardized measurement methods for the elements of elder
mistreatment is urgently needed to move the field forward. The field must
develop widely accepted operational definitions of the elements of elder
CONCEPTS, DEFINITIONS, AND GUIDELINES FOR MEASUREMENT                       59

mistreatment, its different forms, and associated risk factors and outcomes.
The field must also develop a series of measures for these elements, with
good (and known) reliability and validity. A menu of measures is necessary
for each of the multiple contexts of research, including screening and case
identification in clinical settings as well as studies of elder mistreatment in
populations. To the extent that dichotomous classifications of mistreat-
ment are needed, agreement must be reached on what LEAD-type method-
ology will be used in place of a gold standard for such studies.
     Agreement on operational definitions for research may provide a useful
foundation for developing standard definitions and classification criteria
for surveillance and reporting. It is conceivable that a consensus conference
could be convened to propel this process forward, although such an effort
may be premature in the absence of greater experience in the field develop-
ing the approach outlined in this chapter. Another possibility would be to
initiate a consensus process in a more limited domain—such as defining
mistreatment in the context of developing definitions and measures of qual-
ity in long-term care, as recommended in a recent report on this subject by
the Institute of Medicine (2001). (see Chapter 7 for further discussion).
                                      3

                 A Theoretical Model of
                   Elder Mistreatment




                       T    he limited research on elder mistreatment lacks
an overarching framework within which to understand the multiplicity of
its ill-defined manifestations. Concerned citizens, clinicians of various sorts,
including emergency room physicians, social workers, nurses, the police,
and even the victims themselves report incidents of apparent mistreatment
to the authorities (such as state adult protective services). They, in turn,
investigate and classify them according to disparate legal definitions, collat-
ing them for reporting purposes but with only limited cross-state compara-
bility. Academic researchers have tried their hand at identifying and cata-
loguing individuals subject to elder mistreatment in the population at large.
But they too lack a fully developed theoretical framework that could serve
to guide data collection efforts and permit a more effective assessment of
(1) the differential prevalence of elder mistreatment by significant social
attributes and (2) the causal sequences leading to enhanced risk of elder
mistreatment.
      As a result, the knowledge base about even the most elementary facts
concerning elder mistreatment is incomplete, contradictory, misleading, and
noncumulative. We are told, for example, that the majority of elder mis-
treatment cases are women. Yet we are not in a position to evaluate
whether this is simply the result of the disproportionate number of elders
who are women (due to differential mortality by gender) or whether women
do indeed face a higher risk of elder mistreatment than men. Most studies
reporting this finding simply lack a way of properly assessing the popula-
tion base from which the clinical observations were generated.

                                      60
A THEORETICAL MODEL OF ELDER MISTREATMENT                                                    61

                 RISK MODEL OF ELDER MISTREATMENT
                        IN DOMESTIC SETTINGS
     Here we would like to propose, as a first approximation, a theoretical
sketch for the study of elder mistreatment that in our view could help to
codify the findings already in hand and to provide a framework within
which to organize future research efforts.1 It is offered in the spirit of
starting a conversation about theoretically meaningful next steps rather
than as a fully fleshed-out theoretical model. It draws its inspiration from
George L. Engels’s (1977) challenge to the reigning biomedical model of the
time. He proposed a biopsychosocial model explicitly encompassing psy-
chological and social factors in explaining biophysiological conditions, such
as disease or aging processes. It has attracted increasing attention, most
recently providing the framework within which a task force of the Institute
of Medicine organized its discussion of sexually transmitted diseases (Insti-
tute of Medicine, 1997; see also Laumann et al., 1994:3-34, 541-548; Ensel
and Lin, 2000). In Engels’s view, the narrow biomedical model, with its
highly individualistic, clinically centered presumptions, should be expanded
to incorporate a multiperson interactional scheme with three sets of interre-
lated factors: the physiological, the psychological, and the social. What is
missing from Engels’s model is a fuller consideration of the environing
cultural and social contexts in which these microprocesses are embedded.
     The definition of elder mistreatment in Chapter 2 stipulates both a
victim of mistreatment (the focal subject) and a responsible actor (a trusted
other, typically the caregiver) that together lie at the center of analytic
attention. The interaction between the characteristics of the potential vic-
tim of mistreatment (e.g., his or her changing health status, dependency,
competencies) and those of the responsible actor (e.g., his or her care bur-
den, stress, financial dependence) must be an essential feature of any analy-
sis. In addition, contextual risk factors, such as those referring to location
(type of institution, at home, etc.), social relationship (e.g., spousal, adult
child caregiver, formal role caregiver like lawyer, nurse), and the broader
sociocultural context (defined by race, ethnicity, religion, region, urban/
rural location, and socioeconomic status), may set different generic levels of
risk for the individuals embedded in them.
     Figure 3-1 provides a bird’s eye overview of the generic factors in the
model of the risks for elder mistreatment, while Figure 3-2 presents a

  1Several other theoretical sketches have been proposed in the research literature, including
Ansello (1996); Phillips (1983); Schiamberg and Gans (1999); and Wolf and Pillemer (1989).
The current framework attempts to be more comprehensive, including mistreatment both in
domestic and institutional settings. In addition, it is applicable to multiple types of mistreat-
ment. The sketches in the literature, however, are completely consistent in spirit and thrust
with it.
62                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT


                           Sociocultural Context

         Social                                                 Social
      Embeddedness of                                       Embeddedness of
         Subject                                            Trusted Other(s)




      Individual-Level            Status Inequality          Individual-Level
      Factors (Subject)                                      Factors (Trusted
                                                                 Other(s))




                                 Relationship Type




                           Power and Exchange Dynamics




                                    Outcomes


FIGURE 3-1    Summary overview of the model for elder mistreatment.



detailed specification of selected variables to be operationalized in applying
the model to the empirical world.
    It is fundamentally a model of a transactional process unfolding over
time among the elder person, his or her trusted other, and other interested
parties (stakeholders) concerned with his or her well-being in the context of
changes in the physical, psychological, and social circumstances of the
several parties as the result of the elder person’s aging process and life
course. This is called the microprocess, encompassing the factors that
could be associated with the risk of mistreatment. In addition, this model
should be understood as being embedded in an environing sociocultural
context, such as the region of the country, the institutional or organiza-
tional locus (such as a nursing home, assisted living quarters, private house-
hold), and race or ethnic group of the elder person that are associated with
A THEORETICAL MODEL OF ELDER MISTREATMENT                                                                     63

                                     Sociocultural Context
           Social                                                                        Social
      Embeddedness/                                                                Embeddedness
           Context                                                             Ties to Family and Friends
 Ties to Family and Friends                                                          (Stakeholders)
       (Stakeholders)                                                              of Trusted Other(s)
          of Subject



      Individual Level                                                             Individual Level
      Factors (Subject)                                                           Factors (Trusted
                                                Status Inequality
  1. Master social statuses                                                            Other(s))
  (e.g., wealth, race,                                                      1. Master social statuses
                                            Differences in gender, age,
  ethnicity, religion, kinship                                              (e.g., wealth, race, ethnicity,
                                                  race, education
  status)                                                                   religion, kinship status)
  2. Physical health status                                                 2. Physical health status
  (e.g., chronic diseases                                                   (e.g., chronic diseases
  [diabetes, heart] or acute                                                (diabetes, heart) or acute
  illness)                                                                  illness)
                                                Relationship Type
  3. Personality charac-                                                    3. Personality characteristics
                                            Whether noncoresidential,
  teristics and mental health                                               and mental health status (e.g.,
                                             cohabitational or marital
  status (e.g., dementia,                                                   dementia, depression, social
                                              partnership, or alone
  depression, social                                                        competence, intelligence,
  competence, intelligence,                                                 certain personality
  certain personality                                                       characteristics)
  characteristics)
                                                                            4. Beliefs and attitudes about
  4. Beliefs and attitudes                                                  aging, kinship, and care-giving
  about aging, kinship, and                                                 obligations
  care-giving obligations


                                       Power and Exchange Dynamics
                                       Negotiation of care-giving scripts
                                          (e.g., complete, moderate, or
                                        limited dependency and need for
                                          assistance in performing daily
                                                  living routines )



                                                      Outcomes

                                 1. Physical and emotional health/happiness of
                                    subject/trusted other(s)

                                 2. Elder mistreatment (recurrent vs. episodic
                                    vs. crisis-centered events leading to physical,
                                    mental, or social harms)

                                 3. Durability of care-giving relationship (i.e.,
                                    likelihood of termination)

                                 4. Sense of security and trust


FIGURE 3-2         A schematic outline of the model for elder mistreatment.
64                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

different levels of risk for mistreatment. For example, it may be the case
that different organizational settings (e.g., nursing homes, assisted living
quarters) may have different characteristic levels of elder mistreatment risk.
This feature of the model is the macrostructure in which the microprocesses
described in Figure 3-2 occur. The risk of elder mistreatment can be con-
ceptualized as the varying likelihood of an event or set of events causing
harm to the elder person. This risk is a function of the various sets of
variables depicted in the model at both the macro and micro levels.
     The left side of the diagram includes the set of social, physical, and
psychological attributes of the subject at risk of elder mistreatment, and the
right side lists the pertinent attributes of the trusted other. The middle set
of boxes represents the interaction of the two sets of individual-level vari-
ables that define the level of social or economic dependence (status inequal-
ity), type of social relationship in which the interaction between the elder
person and the trusted other happens, with corresponding differences in the
normative expectations held by different stakeholders and the power dy-
namics in negotiating the operative care-giving scripts (see Simon and
Gagnon, 1987; Mahay et al., 2001). Note that we have also included
“social embeddedness,” which refers to the sets of people in the social
networks of the elder person and the trusted other, respectively, constitut-
ing the social capital available in the dyadic transaction (see Sandefur and
Laumann 1998). These two networks may overlap or not, with attendant
consequences for their efficacy in exerting social control over the dyadic
interaction of focal interest. Social networks can serve critical functions of
monitoring the situation and informing relevant others when shortfalls or
problems arise. Their presence may also serve as a form of social control on
the behavior of the focal parties. Their absence greatly enhances the vulner-
ability of the elder person and the trusted other to the risk of elder mistreat-
ment (see House et al., 1988; Lin et al., 1999). Finally, outcomes include
the physical and emotional health and happiness of the elder person and the
trusted other, the differential risks of elder mistreatment in its varied forms,
and the durability (or risk of termination) of the caregiving relationship
itself.
     We should expect that all these outcomes have feedback effects on the
variables above them—that is, the paths connecting outcomes to the boxes
listing the independent variables are double-headed rather than unidirec-
tional. For example, we might expect that the occurrence of an incident of
elder mistreatment increases the odds of additional events of elder mistreat-
ment, as it adversely affects physical, psychological, and social statuses for
both the elder person and the trusted other. A mistreated elder is more
likely to respond with depression, physical disability, or social withdrawal
as a direct or indirect reaction to the mistreatment—each of which may
enhance the likelihood of another incident. Similarly, the perpetrator may
A THEORETICAL MODEL OF ELDER MISTREATMENT                                   65

feel increased stress in his or her situation and become more likely to
respond in an abusive manner to another challenge to his or her caregiving
capabilities. In short, the overarching conception of the model is one of a
time-dependent process with feedback loops that interact with the “inde-
pendent” variables over time.
     Such a conception highlights the critical need for longitudinal studies to
gain a better understanding of the underlying dynamics. The clinically and
forensically oriented literature often characterizes the issue as one of en-
hancing case identification methods so that “findings” of culpability can be
established. But this leads to a focus on punishment and deterrence as the
principal goals of intervention. A process-oriented account of elder mis-
treatment, in contrast, would lead to investigation of the reversibility of the
process by providing a better understanding of the etiology of specific
forms of elder mistreatment and therefore a better understanding of the
preventive and remedial measures that could be undertaken.
     Such a perspective would benefit from knowledge gained by qualita-
tively and phenomenally oriented research designed to flesh out the mean-
ings of different forms of elder mistreatment. For example, how does
spousal mistreatment differ from adult child mistreatment? What are the
differences between one-shot or episodic mistreatment in response to a
crisis situation that overwhelmed the caregiver and chronic or recurrent
elder mistreatment in a long-term marriage characterized by recurrent physi-
cal conflict? We often speak of the heterogeneity of the phenomena of elder
mistreatment, but there are literally no studies that attempt to explore the
nature of that heterogeneity. At present, we are functioning at the level of
commonsense classes, perhaps informed by legal distinctions rather than
scientifically informed classification. Legal categories of elder mistreatment
are highly heterogeneous in their phenomenal base and may thus arise from
quite different etiologies, with correspondingly various implications for the
kinds of interventions that might successfully be pursued. In regard to the
potential opportunities and foci for prevention and intervention, the phe-
nomena may be basically independent in cases of (a) battering by an inti-
mate partner that persists as part of a long-term, even life-long pattern; (b)
battering by an intimate partner that begins in late life (perhaps because of
a transformation in the marital relationship as a result of changes in physi-
cal well-being or the social status and financial well-being of one or both
spouses); (c) neglectful or abusive care by other kin who face a multiplicity
of overwhelming care needs as well as other, perhaps unrelated problems;
(d) neglectful or abusive care by employees of adult day programs, nursing
homes, and hospitals; and (e) crimes of opportunity, in which dependent
persons are exploited by caregivers who take advantage of access to finan-
cial resources.
66                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

              RISK MODEL OF ELDER MISTREATMENT
                   IN INSTITUTIONAL SETTINGS
      Figure 3-2 implicitly assumes that the trusted other (the right-hand side
of the figure) was a family member or friend operating in the context of the
informal provision of caregiving to the elder person in a private household.
Let us now assume that the trusted other is an employee or volunteer
working for an organization, such as a nursing home or hospice—that is, let
us consider the model’s applicability to institutional settings. Figure 3-3
specifies the set of variables (on the right-hand side of the model in Figure
3-1 down through individual-level factors) that are relevant to characteriz-
ing the organization as constituting the context within which trusted others
(i.e., various staff members) are serving as the responsible care providers.
We first note that there is a larger institutional context in which the organi-
zation is found—e.g., a particular region or state that has a stricter or more
lax regulatory environment than other areas or a remote rural location (in
comparison to an urban location) that hinders the access of the elder
person’s social network for visiting and monitoring what is going on. Next
we can characterize the specific organizational facility with respect to its
size, staff/resident ratios, per capita expenditures, etc.—all of which may be
expected to be associated with different levels of risk of the caregivers in
their employ engaging in elder mistreatment. For example, poorly man-
aged and funded facilities with inadequate staff might be expected to pose a
much greater likelihood of their staff engaging in elder mistreatment than
the staff at well-run, well-funded facilities. Finally, we consider the indi-
vidual-level attributes of the actual care providers themselves as affecting
the relative risks of elder mistreatment. Can we, for example, expect more
or less risk of elder mistreatment as a function of the training and experi-
ence of the care providers, or of racial, ethnic, or class differences between
the elder person and the trusted other?
      Figure 3-4 provides another take on the model that may help clarify
what we have in mind. It can be regarded as a subsidiary process nested
within the overarching model depicted in Figure 3-2. In this case, we
consider an adverse physical change in the elder person’s health status—
e.g., the onset of vascular dementia. The risk of acquiring vascular demen-
tia is shown to be a function of a set of prior factors, such as the subject’s
nutritional status, poverty, etc. With onset of the disease process, we
expect a decline in physical function, including hypertension, depression,
etc., that adversely affects the elder person’s psychological outlook and
social functionality (e.g., a decline in sexual interest and attractiveness to
spouse). Diminished capacity to perform daily routines and increased de-
mands on the spouse for help, combined with a loss of social facility and
increased depressive behavior on the elder person’s part, put increasing
                        Elaboration of right-hand side of Figure 3-1 for institutional care providers




Sociocultural Context                 Social Embeddedness of the                           Individal-Level Factors characterizing
of institutional care                 specific organizational facility                     individual employees/volunteers who
providers                             providing care to subject                            provide care to subject


 Region of country                     Organizational characteristics,                      Individual characteristics of staff
                                       such as size of facility, resident/                  care provider(s) in contact with
 State regulatory                      staff ratio, annual per capita                       resident subject, including
 environment                           operating expenses, proprietary                      relevant work experience,
                                       versus nonprofit, assisted versus                    stress and exhaustion,
 Urban-rural location                  full care, average age of residents,                 individual status characteristics
                                       average health status of residents,                  including race, age, gender
                                       supervision to staff ratio, staff
                                       turnover



FIGURE 3-3    Model of risk factors for different levels of risk for engaging in elder mistreatment by institutional care providers.
                                                                                                                                       67
                                                                                                                                     68




  Physical Factors
                                                    Decline in physical function
   - Hypertension                                                                                 Increased dependency on
   - Hyperlipidemia                                                                               caregiver to perform daily
   - Atrial fibrillation                                                                          living routines
  Socio-
  Environmental
  Factors

   - Poverty                                                 Alteration in         Decresed competency                Elder
   - Education                    Vascular dementia          social function       to maintain social support         mistreatment
   - Embeddedness


  Psychosocial
  Factors

   - Depression
   - Stress
   - Support

                                      Alteration in psychological function                 Increased depression and
                                                                                           cognitive impairment


FIGURE 3-4     Impact of vascular dementia on risk of elder mistreatment in people age 55 and older.
A THEORETICAL MODEL OF ELDER MISTREATMENT                                   69

stress on the caregiver, who feels captive to a deteriorating, “no-win” situ-
ation. He reacts with frustration and anger, finally physically hitting her in
response to a “petty” demand for attention—an act that never occurred
before in their many years of marriage. The figure attempts to identify the
set of variables and their probable causal order; it also stresses the interac-
tive character of the process over time. It should help guide the selection
and measurement of the pertinent variables in evaluating this account of
elder mistreatment risk.


                          RECOMMENDATION
     The problem of identifying rare events like elder mistreatment is made
more difficult because of its strong social stigmatization. It is quite analo-
gous to the problem faced in studying AIDS infection in the population.
AIDS is such a rare event (0.61 percent prevalence rate in the United States)
that it is prohibitively expensive to get a sample size large enough to recruit
sufficient cases for statistical analysis, even if one could assume that people
would willingly disclose their infection status. Instead, analysis has focused
on the prevalence of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) inclusively de-
fined, which have an estimated prevalence of 18 percent in the U.S. adult
population age 18 to 59 (see Laumann and Youm, 2001:339), a much more
workable situation from a statistical point of view. This could be done
because the mechanisms implicated in STD transmission approximate fairly
closely those implicated in AIDS transmission in the United States. A
similar strategy could be undertaken for elder mistreatment, in which we
could identify more broadly inclusive adverse events, for example, frequent
and intense verbal arguments between the elder person and the caregiver,
which are likely to include the events that meet a stricter definition of elder
mistreatment.
     The objective of this discussion has been to provide a comprehensive,
flexible theoretical framework within which to organize research efforts
employing qualitative as well as quantitative methodologies. Appropriately
deployed in systematic empirical research, these methodologies can illumi-
nate the fundamental processes generating the differential risks of elder
mistreatment for both the elder population at large and for those who
perform caregiving roles. Armed with a better understanding of the under-
lying processes, we will be in a much better position to devise more effective
intervention strategies to reduce these risks.
     In sum, we are unlikely to obtain much information relevant to preven-
tion and post-mistreatment intervention in cases of elder mistreatment until
the field moves toward a program of research that is grounded in an under-
standing of the everyday lives of older people in relation to their intimate
partners and their other caregivers; the experience (phenomenology) of
70                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

these relationships and their meaning to the people involved; the situational
and motivational factors that tend to enhance or impair the cognitive per-
formance of older people and their corollary capacity to protect their own
interests; and the social factors driving—and potentially regulating—the
settings in which older persons live, especially those who are cognitively
impaired or financially dependent.
     The theoretical sketch outlined in this chapter offers one approach for
stimulating the thinking and research needed by the field at this stage in its
development.
     The panel recommends systematic, theory-driven longitudinal research,
both qualitative and quantitative, exploring the changing dynamics of elder
people’s relationships and the risk of mistreatment, as they are affected by
changing health status, social embeddedness, and caregiving and living
arrangements, in both domestic and institutional contexts.
                                      4


  The Occurrence of Elder Mistreatment




                       T     his chapter reviews the scientific and logistical
issues pertinent to the determination of mistreatment occurrence in the
United States and elsewhere, identifies gaps in knowledge, and makes rec-
ommendations for possible research directions. Research to determine
mistreatment occurrence rates or trends should, above all, be guided by the
rationale for conducting the epidemiological inquiry. Is universal case
finding critical within a population, or will probabilistic assessments to
estimate incidence and prevalence suffice? Will the findings be used for
specific local adult protective program design or as a guide to general policy
formulation? Will there be a search for community indicators of elder
mistreatment that are easily available or ascertainable if not totally accurate
or precise? How will the findings inform clinical practice activities, particu-
larly those related to frail older persons? Will private or governmental
funds be allocated based on the findings, either for general prevention and
control, criminal justice programs, or specific agency budgets? While the
various available methods for determining occurrence estimates vary in
precision and completeness, all may be of substantial value.
     Basic to determining mistreatment occurrence rates is an understanding
of sound epidemiological principles and vocabulary. While this is beyond
the scope of this volume, an introduction to basic epidemiological study
design is presented in Box 4-1 to enable the nonspecialist reader to better
understand the discussion that follows.



                                      71
72                                                                 ELDER MISTREATMENT



                                 BOX 4-1
               An Overview of Epidemiological Study Designs

         Epidemiology can be defined as the study of the distributions, determinants,
     and outcomes of health and disease in populations. These populations may be
     geographically defined, but they may also be clinical or institutional groups. Full
     population definition usually requires further demographic characterization, at a
     minimum. The determinants or causes of health and disease states are often
     referred to as risk factors. Outcomes of interest span a wide spectrum, including,
     for example, mortality, symptom severity, disease progression, other new mental
     and physical conditions (morbidity), the costs of illness, disability and dysfunction,
     and satisfaction with medical care. Epidemiology may be observational, wherein
     the world is observed as it is, or experimental and interventional, wherein experi-
     mental or quasi-experimental interventions are invoked Within observational epi-
     demiology, descriptive epidemiology generally refers to the quantitative occurrence
     of health and disease phenomena in characterized populations, often using rates
     over a specified period of time, and requiring a known population denominator.
     For example, a prevalence rate describes how frequently the event of interest,
     regardless of time of onset, occurs at any point within a specified time interval. An
     incidence rate is the rate of new events in the population occurring within that
     interval.
         Epidemiology can also be analytical as well as descriptive. There are many
     analytical study designs to assess population phenomena; three are basic to as-
     sessing health and disease in populations. Cross-sectional assessments or sur-
     veys, at one defined point in time, can be used to determine prevalence rates,
     characterize those in whom the events of interest exist, and explore statistical
     associations among the study variables of interest.
         The case-control, or retrospective, study takes many forms and is mainly in-
     tended to identify risk factors for diseases and conditions. In its simplest applica-
     tion, new cases of a disease are identified, a demographically similar control group
     is designated, and differences in prior “exposure” rates to the risk factors of inter-
     est are calculated. The cohort or longitudinal study in essence starts with a de-
     fined population in whom putative risk factor information has been well character-
     ized, but in whom the disease or condition of interest has not yet occurred. The
     population is then followed for incident events of interest, which are then related to
     previously acquired risk factor information. Each type of study can be elaborated
     and each has strengths, weaknesses, and methodological nuances. Full descrip-
     tions of these epidemiological methods for both community and clinical settings
     can be found in standard textbooks of epidemiology and clinical epidemiology.




               OCCURRENCE OF ELDER MISTREATMENT
     While clinical descriptions of elder mistreatment are present in histori-
cal texts, even now there have been few population-referent, geographically
based studies of elder mistreatment occurrence in the modern, peer-re-
viewed literature. The latter third of the twentieth century saw the descrip-
THE OCCURRENCE OF ELDER MISTREATMENT                                       73

tion of the clinical syndrome and reports of various series of elder mistreat-
ment victims, usually from geriatrically oriented facilities or programs man-
aging chronic illnesses in older persons, and later from social service agen-
cies. Gradually, recommended elder mistreatment definitions and criteria
began to appear, and many of these recommendations have been published
(see Chapter 2). Often, the basic demographic and clinical characteristics
of elder mistreatment patients were defined in part by the nature of the
study facilities as well by the patients/victims. Early clinical descriptions
paved the way for later studies of elder mistreatment risk factors. Using
case records from public health nurses, Phillips (1983) reported one of the
first case-control studies of risk factors for elder abuse.
     Estimates of the occurrence of abuse and neglect have varied from
about 2–10 percent annual incidence, although the bases for these estimates
are modest and uncertain (Branch, 2001). The issue of incidence versus
prevalence and the recurrent nature of the problem among individual vic-
tims and other issues (discussed below) make these estimates very insecure.
For example, Thomas (2000) reviewed both formally published and other
data on elder mistreatment occurrence. The lack of population-based stud-
ies in this review is clear, and much of the information reviewed came from
institutional and social service agency sources. Other than representative
household samples, some research has explored samples of adult protective
service workers, assessing their observations and experiences (Dolan and
Blakeley, 1989) and other public and private institutional employees who
may have contact with abused elders, such as police authorities, hospital
personnel, and bank employees (National Center on Elder Abuse). While
important, these approaches identify only those (potential or actual) elder
mistreatment victims who have come to public attention and probably
underestimate the true elder mistreatment occurrence rates.
     One of the first and historically most important population-based stud-
ies of elder mistreatment was conducted by Pillemer and Finkelhor (1988).
This was a prevalence study using a probability sample of noninstitution-
alized persons age 65 and older residing in metropolitan Boston. Interviews
were conducted over the telephone and in person using structured question-
naires and standardized criteria for three domains of elder mistreatment:
physical abuse, psychological abuse, and neglect. About 72 percent of the
eligible respondents were interviewed. Including all three elder mistreat-
ment domains studied, they reported an overall rate of 3.2 percent.
     A few other population-based studies have been published. Comijs et
al. (1998) studied physical and psychological abuse in a cohort of Dutch
elders in Amsterdam, using structured interviewing techniques. Overall,
the one-year prevalence of elder mistreatment was 5.6 percent, with verbal
aggression being the most common; the prevalence of physical aggression
was 1.2 percent. In a telephone interview study of national samples from
74                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

Sweden and Denmark, Tornstam (1989) queried respondents about whether
they had observed or knew about specific cases of persons who had been
physically battered, threatened, economically abused, robbed, or severely
neglected. The overall rate defined this way was 8 percent, but most cases
were due to a single incidence of theft. The definitions were not always
consistent with those used in other elder mistreatment studies, but most
importantly, the individual respondent was not the unit of analysis.
      Podnieks (1992) reported the findings from a representative telephone
survey of Canadians age 65 and older. Domains included physical abuse,
neglect, psychological abuse, and “material abuse.” The overall prevalence
rate was about 4 percent, but this was a cumulative experience since age 65,
so the annual rates would be difficult to calculate; the most common form
was material abuse (2.6 percent). Ogg (1993) attempted to repeat the
Pillemer and Finkelhor survey in London but for methodological reasons
was unable to obtain credible occurrence information.
      Thus, based on the published, peer-reviewed literature and some efforts
at obtaining unindexed, non-peer-reviewed studies, there appears to be
little population-based information about elder mistreatment occurrence,
including the clinical course and outcomes of proven events. It appears that
more population-based approaches to elder mistreatment, including na-
tionally representative samples, are needed. Even less information is known
about elder mistreatment occurrence in institutional settings. Event detec-
tion is extremely challenging and to date only indirect approaches have
been employed to make estimates.
      The paper by Acierno (this volume) summarizes the primary ways in
which elder mistreatment has been detected: (a) direct interview surveys of
potential victims by telephone, personal interview, or self-administered
questionnaire), (b) interviews of families or caregivers of possible victims or
others with a trust relationship, (c) clinical or social service institutional
record review, (d) placement of sentinel reporters within these agencies or
organizations, and (e) acquisition of criminal justice information. Histori-
cally, these techniques have been applied most consistently and will be
likely to continue to be important. Corder (2001) reviews many of the
issues in population sampling and surveying relevant to household assess-
ment of elder mistreatment occurrences. A summary of overall strengths
and weaknesses of these approaches is shown in Table 4-1.
      However, other, less explored methods for identifying elder mistreat-
ment cases are available for research evaluation: (a) a two-stage process,
beginning with screening potential victims for risk factors or risk indica-
tors, using questionnaires, medical record review, and various biomarkers,
with subsequent more intensive evaluation of high-risk persons, (b) screen-
ing fiscal records for types of behaviors associated with financial abuse, (c)
THE OCCURRENCE OF ELDER MISTREATMENT                                        75

active screening of older patients during general medical interactions, either
inside or outside institutional settings, (d) provision of telephone hot lines,
widely publicized and intended to attract victims who can then be further
evaluated, (e) network sampling of social situations in which some forms of
elder mistreatment are possible, (f) enhanced identification of high-risk
persons or elder mistreatment cases using record linkage techniques, (g) the
application of forensic techniques in medical settings, and (h) surreptitious
surveillance of institutional staff in the work setting. None of these ap-
proaches is new, but they at least suggest that innovative approaches to case
detection and surveillance are possible, and that is a needed research direc-
tion.


       IMPORTANT EPIDEMIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
     Important research issues relevant to defining, understanding, and ad-
vancing knowledge of elder mistreatment are discussed throughout this
volume. These issues require detailed attention and are important requi-
sites for planning population- and institution-based epidemiological re-
search on elder mistreatment occurrence. The following sections synthesize
and highlight some of these issues specifically with respect to determining
elder mistreatment occurrence, adding further suggestions for conducting
this research.


       Defining the Situations and Circumstances Being Measured
     Chapters 1 and 2 delineate the types and vocabulary of elder mistreat-
ment. While no investigator must adhere to any particular elder mistreat-
ment conceptualization, specification of the nature and types of mistreat-
ment being assessed in a study is critical, both for understanding and
interpreting the findings and for possible scientific replication. In particu-
lar, operational definitions are critical for quantitative studies under all
circumstances, especially when multiple interviewers, geographic sites, in-
stitutions, or cultural groups are involved.
     The structure of survey items eliciting elder mistreatment flows directly
from the posited elder mistreatment definitions. Since it is axiomatic that in
general survey responses will vary according the wording of survey items, it
seems likely that this will be an issue here as well. Thus, careful item
structuring will require consummate attention. In addition, item detail and
explicitness may alter the type of responses. This was recently demon-
strated in a related area—the survey of assessment of sexual victimization
among college women (Fisher et al., 2000).
76                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

TABLE 4-1 Strengths and Weaknesses of Different Approaches to
Population-Based Elder Mistreatment Case Identification
Elder Mistreatment
Case Identification
Strategy                    Strengths                        Weaknesses

1. Interview of potential   -Victims can be identified       -Some elder mistreatment
   victims; all modes        with regularity through          victims will not admit
                             self-report.                     mistreatment events for
                            -Nature and severity of the       various reasons.
                             mistreatment acts as well       -Cognitive impairment may
                             as many antecedents can          preclude accurate
                             be characterized.                reporting.
                            -Structured operational          -Interview setting in which
                             criteria for case definitions    perpetrators are present
                             can be most rigorously           may deter reporting.
                             applied.                        -Access to some elder
                                                              mistreatment victims may
                                                              be limited by sampling
                                                              incompleteness, household
                                                              refusals, language barriers,
                                                              or illness.
                                                             -Not appropriate for study
                                                              of fatal events.
2. Interview of families,   -Perpetrators are known to       -Many perpetrators may not
   other caregivers, and     relate some elder                report elder mistreatment
   others in trust           mistreatment events.             events.
   relationships            -Proxy respondents may           -Proxy respondents may
                             report some elder                have imperfect knowledge
                             mistreatment events more         of events.
                             accurately, as well as some     -Some proxy respondents
                             respondent characteristics       may have illness, frailty, or
                             (e.g., belligerent behavior).    cognitive impairment.
                            -Structured, operational         -Some characteristics of
                             criteria can be uniformly        respondents can’t be
                             applied.                         obtained by proxy
                                                              interview (e.g., emotional
                                                              status).
3. Clinical or social       -Level of objective              -Only selected and more
   service institutional     documentation likely to be       severe cases may be
   record review             high.                            present.
                            -Treatments and social           -Case definitions may not be
                             interventions documented.        consonant with those of
                            -Historical data more likely      investigators.
                             to be obtainable.               -Clinical observations are
                                                              often unstandardized in
                                                              measures and notation.
                                                             -Ancillary and risk factor
                                                              information may not be
                                                              collected in a systematic
                                                              manner.
THE OCCURRENCE OF ELDER MISTREATMENT                                                     77

TABLE 4-1 Continued
Elder Mistreatment
Case Identification
Strategy                    Strengths                       Weaknesses


4. Placement of sentinel    -May identify cases that        -Observers are often
   reporters within          otherwise would not be          professionals who have
   clinical and social       detected or come to             other obligations.
   agencies or               clinical attention.            -Variation in personal
   organizations            -Observers can be sensitive      powers of clinical
                             to case screening or            observation.
                             detection criteria.            -Ethical issues in the
                            -May be the most effective       insertion of observers in
                             method in long-term care        some settings.
                             settings.

5. Acquisition of criminal -Can identify some cases         -Cases likely to be a highly
   justice information      that otherwise may not be        selective subsample of
                            subject to clinical or social    cases, more severe, and
                           service detection.                only of certain types.
                           -Legal dimensions of elder       -Information may not be
                            mistreatment occurrence          collected in a systematic
                            more fully documented.           manner.




                      Specifying the Unit of Measurement
    As Acierno (this volume) and others suggest, the elder mistreatment
“event” is not always easy to characterize. Target elder mistreatment events
for detection may be single or multiple occurrences, happening over short
or long periods of time, and involving one or more victims (particularly in
the institutional setting) or one or more perpetrators, yielding potentially
diverse clinical, social, or functional outcomes. Thus, a variety of events
may make up the numerator of interest: a single act by a perpetrator, a
single act on a victim, a series of elder mistreatment acts by a perpetrator
regardless of the number of victims, a series of acts on one victim, and so
on. Similarly, the denominator used in rate calculations may vary and
requires clear specification. Is it all persons in an age group, all persons in
a trust relationship, all persons exposed to a potential perpetrator, or per-
sons with a particular risk profile? Will the analysis be presented as a
“person-time” calculation, in which potential victims are at risk only dur-
ing specified times, such as the night shift in a long-term care institution?
The complex and fluid nature of social “exposures” requires great care in
specifying both the numerator and denominators in occurrence rates.
78                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

                  Understanding the Clinical Course and
                    Outcomes of Elder Mistreatment
     As noted above, clinical observation suggests that elder mistreatment
may take place over a long period of time, and that only at certain times,
such as when a severe injury or evidence of willful neglect increases, will the
situation become clinically, socially, or legally apparent. As pointed out by
Acierno (this volume) and suggested in other studies of later-life suicide
attempts (Dube et al., 2001) and victimization from sexual or physical
abuse (Cold et al., 2001), for some elder mistreatment victims the origins
may reach back to youth or young adulthood, or they have been in place
within a family relationship for many years, although the causal mecha-
nisms are unclear. Ascertaining multiple events over long periods, particu-
larly in retrospect, can understandably be extremely difficult. However,
not only for defining the start of an “incident” elder mistreatment event,
but more importantly for understanding the causes and trajectory of elder
mistreatment, a broad, sometimes lifelong view of the problem seems essen-
tial. This amplifies the plea for more longitudinal studies of elder mistreat-
ment. It is possible, for example, that retrospective medical record review,
when available, may identify early elder mistreatment events that were
unrecognized at the time. In medical parlance, it seems likely that many
cases of elder mistreatment are remittent or recurrent but, with few excep-
tions (Lachs et al., 1997b), there is little quantitative work on this issue.
     A similar issue relates to the short- and long-term impact of elder
mistreatment on victims. A critical question that is almost unanswered is
how elder mistreatment relates to the clinical, social, institutional, finan-
cial, psychological, and mortal outcomes of elder mistreatment victims and
the overall impact of elder mistreatment on elder population health. For
example, an important issue in gerontological public health is whether the
mobility and functional status of elders in the United States has been im-
proving, paralleling the increasing longevity seen in the latter part of the
twentieth century (Manton et al., 1997; Freedman and Martin, 1999;
Schoeni et al., 2001). This is important for forecasting and planning future
health care and fiscal needs. Given the evidence that at least some popula-
tion functional improvement has occurred, evidence to explain this phe-
nomenon should be sought, in order to enhance preventive and therapeutic
practice. It is at least a hypothesis that knowledge of elder mistreatment
occurrence rates over time could be helpful in understanding secular trends
in the prevalence and outcomes of elder population disability. In fact, elder
mistreatment may be important and common enough to also consider when
planning and evaluating long-term disease and disability prevention and
treatment trials targeting vulnerable, dependent, and frail elders.
     Clinical, functional, and population elder mistreatment outcomes could
THE OCCURRENCE OF ELDER MISTREATMENT                                        79

be studied in several research contexts. One set of relevant outcomes
relates to the immediate consequences of mistreatment itself, including such
factors as return to previous health status, wound or fracture healing rates,
preservation or loss of psychological well-being, the status of general chronic
disease control measures, and the immediate social and legal responses to
mistreatment. Another set of outcomes relates to the effects of whatever
interventions transpire, not only on the rates and intensity of further mis-
treatment, but also on new and preexisting medical conditions, victim sat-
isfaction with the intervention, the types of medical service utilization en-
gendered, the costs of the intervention process, and the long-term costs of
social and medical care.
     One particularly interesting question is whether, and under what cir-
cumstances, subjective measures of personal security or well-being could be
developed as an ultimate outcome measure, both for the effects of mistreat-
ment as well as for the effects of interventions. Obviously, many other
factors affect an individual’s personal sense of security, and studies using
such a measure of outcome would have to deal with this problem method-
ologically, but this is a challenge worth undertaking. As a research ques-
tion, it would be interesting to know whether this perception is related to
the ability to restore optimal medical and mental health and well-being
after elder mistreatment is detected and addressed.


                    Interface with the Public Health,
                 Medical Care, and Social Services Systems
     From a community perspective, it is clear that cases of elder mistreat-
ment are underascertained by existing public health, social, medical, and
legal activities and systems; this is understandable despite the need for
improvement. Several papers in this volume acknowledge the important
roles of these systems and programs in identifying cases as one technique
for determining elder mistreatment occurrence. This is particularly true
since a substantial proportion of elder mistreatment episodes appear to
occur in frail elders, who are perhaps least likely to participate in household
surveys. As reviewed by Acierno and Dyer et al. (this volume), there has
been considerable work in trying to improve recognition of elder mistreat-
ment in the formal program setting, especially within clinical health and
social services. It seems clear that more research is needed on the interface
of elder mistreatment with these services, and it is important to understand
the nature and value of increased and more refined medical and social
surveillance and screening practices on geographically based elder mistreat-
ment rates. Health care settings could be particularly important, since each
year approximately 85 percent of persons age 65 and older use formal
ambulatory care services and 16–20 percent are hospitalized. With the
80                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

inclusion of long-term care service use and the various forms of residential
and assisted living that contain chore or clinical services, as delineated by
Hawes (this volume), few elder mistreatment victims would be outside the
reach of some type of screening, and most could be identified if accurate,
inexpensive, and comprehensive methods were available.
     As case detection and epidemiological research on elder mistreatment
proceed, the importance of some basic public health notions becomes clear.
It is important to distinguish between screening, where-by someone is put
into an “elevated probability” group for further evaluation, and case find-
ing, where-by an actual designation of elder mistreatment is made. Both in
research and practice, the two approaches encompass different levels of
rigor and investigation (see Chapter 6 for further discussion). Any substan-
tial increase in either activity could lead to increased elder mistreatment
detection rates and could lead to spuriously increased population occur-
rence rates; community-based elder mistreatment prevention and treatment
programs should be alert for this. Screening research could usefully be
applied to many settings, including all types of medical care sites, social
service and adult protective service settings, and the legal and judicial sys-
tems. As this research progresses, it would also seem to be of value to
monitor the extent of overall community elder mistreatment screening and
case finding, to better understand whether observed changes in elder mis-
treatment secular trends may be due to variation in surveillance intensity.
There may also be long-term variation in the propensity of elders to verbal-
ize and report mistreatment.
     Attention should also be given to the potential role of using existing or
newly developed injury surveillance systems to measure and monitor trends
in certain types of elder mistreatment. For example, violent deaths of elders
will be included in a new National Violent Death Reporting System that
will provide much richer information than is currently available from exist-
ing data sources on homicides and suicides (see Institute of Medicine,
1999). While current surveillance of nonfatal injuries is limited, even the
existing data collected in emergency departments and through hospitals are
not very sensitive for elder mistreatment. The panel encourages the Na-
tional Center for Injury Prevention and Control of the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) to study ways of enhancing the utility of
existing injury surveillance systems for identifying elder mistreatment and
of incorporating it into newly developed systems. Other types of public
health surveillance could also be useful in measuring the occurrence of elder
mistreatment. In many jurisdictions the public health system provides
various levels of preventive and medical care, often emphasizing vulnerable
populations, as well as inspecting and licensing long-term care institutions.
Research on surveillance efficacy in these settings may also be of value.
THE OCCURRENCE OF ELDER MISTREATMENT                                         81

                  Relation of Risk Factors to Occurrence
      Chapter 5 delineates much of what is known about risk factors for
elder mistreatment, and these are not reviewed here. Chapter 5 and the
paper by Acierno make the important point that risk factors may be related
to the environment or to the characteristics of the perpetrator, not only to
those of the victim. Acierno also notes that some elder mistreatment re-
search projects use “known” risk factors for case definition, such as dimen-
sions of dependence and vulnerability, possibly limiting the ability to study
these factors or to identify related risk factors. Investigators should be alert
to this issue when conducting community surveys. For example, if an elder
mistreatment case definition demands the presence of frailty or vulnerabil-
ity, then risk factors for elder mistreatment that may be associated with
more robust older victims cannot easily be explored.
      A related issue is the problem of applying clinical risk factors to case
definitions of elder mistreatment. Older persons, particularly frail elders,
have many clinical problems and dysfunctions, and from both conceptual
and statistical perspectives it may be challenging to use these risk factors for
case ascertainment. For example, among general, community-dwelling
populations over age 65, over half may have at least one chronic illness and
at least one physical limitation or dependence. In addition, general symp-
toms such as pain, fatigue, and sleep problems abound, as well as organ-
specific complaints, related, for example, to the skin and or the gastrointes-
tinal tract. Thus, the specificity of these factors for case designation may be
lower than hoped. This is discussed more fully in Chapter 6 on case
ascertainment in the clinical setting.
      It may also be useful to distinguish between a risk factor, for which a
causal association to elder mistreatment is being sought, such as the social
isolation of a victim, from a risk indicator, a certain characteristic that is
associated with elder mistreatment but is not thought to be causal. An
example of the latter is an environmental (contextual) factor, such as living
in a community in which the police make frequent domestic violence calls.
It is also possible that some putative risk factors, such as cognitive or other
functional impairment, may in some instances result from elder mistreat-
ment as well as being potential causes, as these impairments may be due to
head trauma, misuse of medications, or some forms of bodily neglect. This
is another reason why understanding the clinical course of elder mistreat-
ment is critical to its detection. It may also be worth restating here that
some risk factors may only be relevant to certain forms of elder mistreat-
ment, and not to all of its forms and manifestations.
      There still is a large amount of work to be done in defining risk factors
for elder mistreatment. More community-based and institution-based stud-
ies are needed, and they should be done in geographically, economically,
82                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

and culturally diverse populations. Also, much more work needs to be
done on how elder mistreatment victims are detected and managed in vari-
ous health care systems and in communities with varying levels of long-
term care and adult protective service availability. Several papers in this
volume note the use of qualitative techniques to further define the various
elder mistreatment “syndromes” and characteristics; further application of
these methods would seem to be of value. Finally, very little is known
about elder mistreatment occurrence and related risk factor status among
minority populations in the United States, including cultural variation in
how mistreatment is defined and perceived. In general, a more diversified
approach to research on risk factor and occurrence assessment would
achieve several ends: (a) more critically defining populations with higher
and lower occurrence rates, (b) determining the generalizability of putative
elder mistreatment risk factor findings across such diverse populations, (c)
more precisely providing sample size estimates for intervention studies
within these populations, and (d) exploiting cross-cultural variation in elder
mistreatment occurrence to better understand its causes.


     Piggybacking Assessment Modules on Existing Population Surveys
     One way to promote research on elder mistreatment occurrence is to
add detection items and instruments to existing field surveys, particularly
those that cover large geographic areas or are national in scope. This is
discussed extensively by Corder (2001).
     On one hand, this could provide several potential advantages: it may
allow substantial resource savings when compared with conducting surveys
de novo; national estimation of elder mistreatment rates could be substan-
tially enhanced; existing surveys may contain important respondent and
family health, social, and economic variables that can be explored as both
risk and outcome variables; and some surveys may have longitudinal data
collection, allowing a time dimension not otherwise available in cross-
sectional surveys.
     On the other hand, there may also be important limitations to this
approach: sensitive assessment of elder mistreatment may not lend itself to
certain modes of data collection, such as mail or telephone surveys; elder
mistreatment themes may not be compatible with the other survey content;
there may be different requirements and challenges in the use of proxy
respondents; there may personal respondent resistance to items related to
elder mistreatment; certain demographic or cultural groups may not be
adequately represented in the parent surveys of interest; and content and
sampling techniques may be unsuitable for many elder mistreatment scien-
tific questions of interest. There may also be limitations on identifying or
following up respondents, should substantial evidence of elder mistreat-
THE OCCURRENCE OF ELDER MISTREATMENT                                      83

ment events emerge. Still, the use of supplementary elder mistreatment
modules within existing or planned large-scale or national surveys would
seem to be a potentially fruitful approach that should be further evaluated.
    The issue of household sampling is paramount in defining elder mis-
treatment occurrence rates. The general experience of household surveys
targeting elders is that the older and more vulnerable potential respondents
are the ones most difficult to access, leading to the potential for underass-
essment of elder mistreatment occurrence. Thus, in many instances, supple-
mentary sampling approaches may be needed, such as through informal
social networks, the health care system, or other social institutions.


                              Record Linkage
     The limitations of interview data as the sole source of elder mistreat-
ment occurrence are apparent. Some of those at greatest risk, as noted
above, may not be able or willing to serve as survey respondents, and while
Acierno (this volume) notes that family members and others may admit to
elder mistreatment, the completeness and accuracy of such declarations are
uncertain. Inaccurate recall among survey respondents in general and older
respondents in particular is well described, and recall accuracy is further
called into question by the increasing levels of cognitive impairment with
advancing age. In fact, Acierno (this volume) begins his discussion of case
detection methods by dichotomizing elder mistreatment victims into those
with and without “significant” cognitive impairment. This may be a useful
construct, but cognitive function is multidimensional and variably progres-
sive, so from the perspective of studying elder mistreatment occurrence, it
may not be easy to categorize case populations into those with and without
cognitive decline in advance of applying the case ascertainment protocol
itself. Clearly, the issue of determining instances of elder mistreatment
among those cognitively impaired is an important research question.
     One potentially important method for enhancing knowledge of the
occurrence and clinical course of elder mistreatment is record linkage. De-
termining the health, social, and economic status of older persons may
profitably be enhanced by compiling information from many sources, in-
cluding information from prior surveys, vital records, health care and health
administrative records, social service and criminal justice records, and
records from other publicly available, potentially health-relevant sectors of
society. The use of primary institutional records should increase the accu-
racy of the information available for analysis and could complement infor-
mation gained from interviews. However, there are several potential chal-
lenges to record linkage, including additional costs, the availability of
electronic record systems, increasing privacy concerns (National Research
Council, 2000a), and the logistics of assembling data from multiple sources.
84                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

Details on the value of data linkage in research and policy formulation can
be found in a report from the National Research Council (1988) and other
sources (Kelman and Smith, 2000). A corollary issue is the need to deter-
mine the accuracy and completeness of the records being linked.


                       Potential Role for Biomarkers
      An unexplored area in determining elder mistreatment occurrence is
the application of biomarkers. A biomarker in this case is any physical,
physiological, or biochemical measure that could assist in identifying vic-
tims of elder mistreatment and could most easily be acquired in field sur-
veys via blood or urine specimens. Even if biomarker associations with
elder mistreatment are proven, these are much more likely to indicate in-
creased risk and would not lead to definitive elder mistreatment designa-
tion. Some biomarker applications may relate to undernutrition, such as
blood cholesterol, albumen, or micronutrient levels. Others may relate to
chronic psychological or physical stress, but as blood or urinary catechola-
mine or cortisol levels or markers of chronic immune dysfunction. Chronic
blunt trauma may increase blood or urinary myoglobin or other muscle
protein degradation products. Additional forensic techniques, both ante-
mortem and postmortem, may be useful detecting elder mistreatment cases.
It is not outside the realm of possibility that genetic markers may be candi-
dates for elder mistreatment research, to the extent that they perhaps reflect
particular behaviors, diseases, or responses to stress and trauma. As one
example, somatic mutation rates in the genome have been proposed as an
indicator of cumulative environmental exposures (Albertini, 1998). The
application of biomarkers to elder mistreatment assessment could be an
area for possible future research. A recent volume addresses many aspects
of applying biomarker acquisition to population surveys (National Re-
search Council, 2000b).


             CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
     1. Population-based surveys of elder mistreatment occurrence are fea-
sible and should be given a high priority by funding agencies. Preparatory
funding should be provided to develop and test measures for identifying
elder mistreatment.
     There is inadequate information on elder mistreatment occurrence
among both community-dwelling and institutionalized elders. However,
before embarking on such surveys, the aims and rationale for them should
be clearly delineated, and the strengths and weaknesses of the survey meth-
odology fully understood. Different methods and approaches may be re-
quired for various types of mistreatment, and multiple modes of case ascer-
THE OCCURRENCE OF ELDER MISTREATMENT                                        85

tainment should be considered and evaluated. Survey-acquired informa-
tion could be enhanced by appropriately applied record linkage techniques.
Complementary study of biomarkers that may enhance elder mistreatment
case identification should be explored.
     Efforts to improve research on incidence and prevalence must move
ahead deliberately while new instruments and measures are being devel-
oped. As noted in Chapter 2, measurement of elder mistreatment has been
hampered by a lack of well-validated and reliable instruments. Several
instruments have been used in elder mistreatment research, but little more
than face validity supports the assumption that they provide valid or reli-
able measures of elder mistreatment, and further instrument development is
needed. As an example, one of the most frequently used instruments in
elder mistreatment research, the Conflict Tactics Scale, has generally been
accepted on the basis of its proven usefulness in other studies on violence in
the family. However, its overall reliability for identifying physical mistreat-
ment in older adults has not been adequately established. Other instru-
ments that have been used in research were developed principally as clinical
screening tools. While they have shown their adequacy in clinical situa-
tions, it is unclear whether they are fully valid measures for defining abuse
and neglect in population or other research contexts, and whether they can
be reliably administered in different research settings.
     In the absence of fully validated instruments that are usable across
settings and types of research, it will be difficult to make effective compari-
sons across studies, either in relation to incidence and prevalence or in
relation to risk factors. With a set of common instruments that are valid
and reliable, as well as criteria matched across instruments, it becomes
possible for useful cross-study comparisons to be made. Furthermore, with
such instruments in place, more rapid progress should be possible in identi-
fying and confirming risk factors. Such instruments must be capable of
differentiating among the varying forms of elder mistreatment as well as
serving as a composite measure. Both for occurrence studies and risk factor
studies, specificity for the various types of elder mistreatment is critical.
     2. Funding agencies should give priority to the design and fielding of
national prevalence and incidence studies of elder mistreatment. These
studies should include both a large-scale, independent study of prevalence
and modular add-ons to other national surveys of aging populations.
     Acquiring valid national elder mistreatment occurrence rates is criti-
cally needed for improved policy formulation. After appropriate method-
ological development, a national survey of elder mistreatment occurrence
and risk factors, designed to inform important policy issues relevant to
elder mistreatment prevention and treatment, should be conducted. The
panel recommends a two-pronged approach for obtaining the needed infor-
mation:
86                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

     • Supplemental modules pertaining to elder mistreatment should be
included in existing comprehensive geographic health and social surveys,
including ongoing longitudinal studies of aging populations. These studies
will require the use of short instruments, or a series of questions, designed
to identify likely victims of elder mistreatment. For reasons of economy, an
alternative is to use these supplemental modules to target only selected
forms of mistreatment, such as physical mistreatment, neglect, and finan-
cial exploitation. The unique contribution of such studies is to provide a
large national sample from which reliable prevalence estimates can be
drawn. Of equal importance, however, is the ability to use the longitudinal
data to identify risk factors, further define health and social outcomes, and
serve relevant policy needs. Elder mistreatment modules appended to exist-
ing national surveys can also serve as a test bed for new scientific ap-
proaches to data collection. Such piggy-backing of elder mistreatment
items and instruments is logistically feasible in most contexts, and attempt
should be made to further this application.
     • Once the measurement issues have been satisfactorily addressed, a
comprehensive national prevalence study of elder mistreatment should be
undertaken. The purpose of this study would be to generate useable na-
tional estimates of prevalence and the critical demographics for each of the
principal forms of elder mistreatment (physical mistreatment, sexual mis-
treatment, emotional mistreatment, financial exploitation, and neglect).
     Both the supplemental module studies and the national prevalence study
must ultimately address family and nonfamily settings, including nursing
homes and the full range of assisted living arrangements and other commu-
nity-based locations in which vulnerable older persons reside. Without
such information, policy makers and program developers have no empirical
basis for assessing the needs of elder mistreatment victims or for deciding
how much to invest in research and prevention programs.
     3. In addition to improved household and geographically referent
sampling techniques, new methods of sampling and identifying elder mis-
treatment victims in the community should be developed in order to im-
prove the validity and comprehensiveness of elder mistreatment occurrence
estimates. It is likely that household sampling, while extremely useful, will
be incomplete to some degree because of difficulty in gaining access to those
households and respondents most at risk of elder mistreatment. A particu-
lar problem is accessing and characterizing the wide variety of assisted
living and related residential facilities where many vulnerable elders are
located. Developing additional ways to approach and access these popula-
tions may require other sampling techniques, such as through social net-
works, institutions, or the health care system.
     4. Research is needed on the phenomenology and clinical course of
elder mistreatment. The clinical course, antecedents, and outcomes of the
THE OCCURRENCE OF ELDER MISTREATMENT                                      87

various types of elder mistreatment occurrence are poorly understood, ne-
cessitating more longitudinal investigations, including follow-up studies of
the clinical, social, and psychological outcomes of elder mistreatment cases
detected. The existing research appears to lack depth and texture. This is
not surprising in light of the field’s early stage of development and the
emphasis thus far placed on occurrence of cases (in population-based sur-
veys and in the clinical setting). If the field is to move forward, attention
must be devoted to theory-driven efforts to identify the intersecting behav-
iors, relationships, and conditions that characterize mistreatment and to
trace its clinical course.
     Longitudinal studies are needed to explore the relationship among dif-
ferent forms of mistreatment, to place descriptive information about risk
factors in context, to trace outcomes, to draw causal inferences, and to
identify potential targets for intervention. For example, what are the indi-
vidual and familial outcomes of elder mistreatment? What proportion of
mistreatment cases result in emergency department visits? To what extent
do persons who experience elder mistreatment develop post-traumatic stress
disorder or other psychiatric conditions? Many elder mistreatment situa-
tions are recurrent and may have various incarnations over long periods,
making the definition of an elder mistreatment “event” difficult to define.
Thus, further work on the nature, periodicity, variation, and triggers for
elder mistreatment is needed and will require longitudinal investigations.
Such longitudinal studies could be enhanced by linkage of medical and
social records, when feasible, to augment the range of available informa-
tion.
     5. The occurrence of elder mistreatment in institutional settings, in-
cluding long-term care and assisted living situations, is all but unchar-
acterized and needs new study sampling and detection methods. Sampling
and surveillance techniques may be different from community-based elder
mistreatment detection, and considerable innovation may be required.
                                     5


    Risk Factors for Elder Mistreatment




                       W       hy do family members (or others in a trust
relationship) mistreat elderly persons? What factors place older persons at
risk? These are critically important questions, but finding answers poses a
number of difficult challenges for researchers. Some of the difficulties are
methodological: obtaining information on a hidden—and for most people,
shameful—phenomenon is a daunting task at best. The search for risk
factors has also been clouded by a 20-year history of elder mistreatment as
a social problem: early assertions, founded on faulty data (or no data at
all), have been frequently repeated and widely believed, despite the lack of
evidence.
     Thus, although fairly extensive research on risk factors for child abuse
and intimate partner abuse has been conducted, the risk factor literature on
elder mistreatment is both limited and inconsistent. It is important to
remedy this situation, for several reasons. First, an understanding of asso-
ciated factors and antecedents of elder mistreatment is necessary for the
development of screening methods. Victims of elder mistreatment infre-
quently seek help for the problem on their own; therefore, by the time the
case has progressed to the point at which it is detected by a service agency,
it is often very complex and difficult to treat. Effective screening could
result in a reduction of the negative effects of elder mistreatment and reduce
the need for extensive treatment.
     Second, specification of risk factors for elder mistreatment is needed to
provide a rational basis for prevention programs. If the risk factors for
elder mistreatment can be uncovered, we may be able to reduce or eliminate

                                     88
RISK FACTORS FOR ELDER MISTREATMENT                                         89

those factors and thus prevent the development of new cases of elder mis-
treatment or deter the progression of existing cases. Third, understanding
risk factors is critical to the development of public policy initiatives. It is
necessary to identify populations at higher risk, and the causes of that
heightened risk, before the costs and benefits of reducing exposure can be
determined (Gordis, 1996).
     A note on terminology will be useful at the outset. For the purposes of
this chapter, following Timmreck (1998), risk factors are defined as experi-
ences, behaviors, aspects of lifestyle or environment, or personal character-
istics that increase the chances that elder mistreatment will occur. In-
creased risk factor exposure increases the probability of the occurrence of
elder mistreatment. As noted in Chapter 2, a distinction can be made
between risk factors (factors that increase the probability that a problem
will occur) and protective factors (factors that decrease the probability of
occurrence). To simplify the discussion, in the rest of the chapter we refer
to risk factors only, in part because most published work involves variables
associated with an increased probability of mistreatment. The discussion of
risk factors, however, may also hold for protective factors. In fact, research
on protective factors may be as important as study of factors that increase
risk, since it may suggest factors that can be put in place as a means of
preventing elder mistreatment.


                 PROBLEMS IN THE RESEARCH BASE
    Prior to summarizing the available findings, it is important to review
briefly the problems in using existing research to establish risk factors for
elder mistreatment. Problems exist in two areas: (1) the nature of the
phenomenon of elder mistreatment itself creates challenges for risk factor
research and (2) specific methodological limitations of existing studies limit
the ability to integrate findings.


                       Nature of Elder Mistreatment
     With some diseases or conditions, attribution of cause can be fairly
simple and straightforward; a salmonella outbreak serves as an example.
Other conditions have very complex causation, and indeed the condition
itself may be difficult to define and identify. Elder mistreatment clearly fits
the latter pattern.
     The complexity of elder mistreatment can be highlighted by reference
to the concept of a “geriatric syndrome”—that is, common clinical prob-
lems that typically do not have a single underlying pathophysiological pro-
cess, but instead have several contributing factors that shape presentation
90                                                       ELDER MISTREATMENT

(Lachs and Pillemer, 1995). Examples of geriatric syndromes include falls,
urinary incontinence, and functional decline.
     Geriatric syndromes share several characteristics: environmental fac-
tors play an important role; interventions must be multifaceted and directed
at both specific pathophysiological problems as well as at contributing
factors in the environment; and such syndromes are often underdiagnosed
and undermanaged by health and social service providers. Elder mistreat-
ment shares these characteristics of a geriatric syndrome. Most important
for the purposes of this chapter, contributing etiologies can be related to the
relative (or person in a trust relationship), to the elder, or to the environ-
ment. Thus, the search for risk factors is both complex and challenging and
necessarily must look for sources of risk in the host (the elderly person), the
agent (the perpetrator), and the environment. As well, it must study the
interplay of factors in these three domains in affecting the risk of elder
mistreatment.


                        Weaknesses of Existing Studies
     The first major limitation of previous risk factor research results from
unclear definition of the object of study. Findings from most studies are
confused in that they do not differentiate the various types of abuse and
neglect articulated earlier in this report. It is likely that the etiology of these
elder mistreatment types differs. Second, different criteria have been used
to determine the population at risk of elder mistreatment. Some researchers
have included persons under age 60 in their studies, while most others have
chosen 60 or 65 as the entry point. Some researchers have restricted their
studies to caregivers of elderly persons or to persons sharing a residence,
while others have included all categories of elderly people.
     Third, studies of risk factors have employed widely differing sampling
methods, including random sample surveys, interviews with patients in
medical practices or caregivers in support programs, and reviews of agency
records. Fourth, few studies that have purported to address risk factors
have in fact included control groups in their designs. In the absence of
controls, the validity of associations between elder mistreatment and puta-
tive risk factors cannot be assessed. Furthermore, even those studies that
have included control groups have often failed to ascertain that the controls
were actually free of elder mistreatment. Fifth, a number of studies have
not employed reliable and valid measurement of the indicators of risk.
     Sixth, with one exception (Lachs et al., 1994, 1997a), prospective stud-
ies of elder mistreatment do not exist. As Lachs and colleagues (1994)
point out, retrospective research designs contain several potential biases:
recall bias—the respondent reinterpreting key facts or feelings from a later
vantage point; information bias—the respondent (especially if cognitively
RISK FACTORS FOR ELDER MISTREATMENT                                         91

impaired) may not be able to recall or provide valid information about
exposure to maltreatment; and the failure of studies to take into account
the timing and duration of events and their progression over time.
     For these reasons, a clear framework of known risk factors for elder
mistreatment cannot be derived from previous research on elder abuse.
Despite a large number of review articles over the past two decades, it must
be acknowledged that any statements about relative risk among the elderly
should be viewed with caution.
     However, the small number of studies using acceptable research de-
signs do reveal some associations that are of interest. In this chapter,
findings from these studies are summarized. For the purposes of the discus-
sion, an attempt has been made to focus on studies that meet two criteria.
First, priority was given to studies that involve a comparison group of some
kind. In such studies, elderly victims (or perpetrators) have been compared
to nonabuse cases uncovered in a survey or to a comparison group of some
kind. Because the literature is so sparse, however, in a few cases, studies are
referred to that have an “implied” comparison group. Second, the study
must have collected information directly from victims and perpetrators and
not from agency records (for problems with using agency records in elder
mistreatment research, see Chapter 2).


   FRAMEWORK FOR ELDER MISTREATMENT RISK FACTORS
    The theoretical model for understanding the risk factors for elder mis-
treatment presented in Chapter 3 includes both the microprocess of genera-
tion of elder mistreatment risk, involving the individual and the trusted
other(s), as well as the environing sociocultural context in which victims
and perpetrators are embedded (such as living environment and social and
economic characteristics). This model indicates the wide array of variables
that could be included in risk factor research.
    To date, a small number of this wide range of potential risk factors has
been addressed in research. These factors, for each of which there is at least
one study, fall into the following categories of the framework depicted in
Figure 3-2:

    Social Embeddedness/Context (subject): social isolation.
    Social Embeddedness/Context (trusted other): social isolation.
    Individual Level Factors (subject): gender, race, dementia, physical
health status, personality characteristics.
    Individual Level Factors (trusted other): mental illness, hostility, alco-
hol abuse, experience of violence or aggression in childhood.
    Relationship Type: Shared living arrangement, relationship to victim
(spouse or child).
92                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

    Power and Exchange Dynamics. Abuser dependency, victim depen-
dency/caregiver stress.

    For the purposes of this chapter, we review these risk factors based on
the supporting evidence. It is possible to categorize risk factors for elder
abuse into three general groups:

    1. Risk factors validated by substantial evidence, for which there is
unanimous or near-unanimous support from a number of studies.
    2. Possible risk factors, for which the evidence is mixed or limited.
    3. Contested risk factors, for which potential for increased risk has
been hypothesized, but for which there is a lack of evidence.

    As the earlier discussion makes clear, however, these categories are
only loosely constructed. All findings should be taken with caution, due to
methodological shortcomings in the studies. Furthermore, the evidence is
generally too limited to make clear distinctions among abuse types. When
such information is available and relevant, it is mentioned below.


     RISK FACTORS VALIDATED BY SUBSTANTIAL EVIDENCE

                            Living Arrangement
    Both clinical accounts and limited empirical research suggest that a
shared living situation is a major risk factor for elder mistreatment, with
older persons living alone at lowest risk (Pillemer and Finkelhor, 1988).
Paveza et al. (1992) found that risk of mistreatment of Alzheimer’s disease
patients by caregivers was greatest when the patient resided with immediate
family members (other than the spouse). Lachs et al. (1997a) found living
alone to be an important protective factor against mistreatment. Pillemer
and Suitor (1992) also found a shared living arrangement to be a risk factor
for violence by Alzheimer’s disease caregivers.
    The mechanisms for the effect of living arrangement are straightfor-
ward. A shared residence increases the opportunities for contact, and thus
conflict and mistreatment. Furthermore, tensions that may be relieved by
simply leaving the immediate situation can escalate into mistreatment (see
Wolf and Pillemer, 1989). Exploration of the differential role of living
arrangement according to type of elder mistreatment needs to be con-
ducted. For example, neglect (as the panel has defined it) by its very nature
suggests a shared living situation, but financial exploitation may occur even
when abuser and victim live apart.
RISK FACTORS FOR ELDER MISTREATMENT                                       93

                              Social Isolation
    Social isolation has been found to be characteristic of families in which
other forms of domestic violence occur. This is in part because behaviors
that are considered to be illegitimate tend to be hidden. Detection of
abusive actions can result in informal sanctions from friends, kin, and
neighbors and formal sanctions from police and the courts. Thus, elder
mistreatment is hypothesized to be less likely in families embedded in strong
social networks.
    Research provides support for this view. In the Lachs et al. (1994)
prospective, community-based study of risk factors for elder abuse, having
a “poor social network” significantly increased risk of mistreatment.
Compton et al. (1997) found low levels of social support to be associated
with verbal and physical abuse by caregivers, as did Wolf and Pillemer
(1989). Grafstrom et al. (1993) found both caregivers and care recipients
to be more socially isolated in families in which abuse occurred. The case
comparison by Phillips (1983) also found abused elder persons to be more
socially isolated.


                                 Dementia
     There are two types of evidence that implicate Alzheimer’s disease or
related dementia as a risk factor for the mistreatment of elderly persons.
First, several studies have estimated prevalence rates of elder mistreatment
in samples of dementia caregivers; these rates can then be compared with
rates in general population surveys. Coyne et al. (1993) found that 11.9
percent of the dementia caregivers in their sample reported having commit-
ted physical abuse. Paveza et al. (1992) found a rate of severe physical
violence toward care recipients of 5.4 percent, which is close to Pillemer
and Suitor’s (1992) finding of 5 percent in a similar sample. Homer and
Gilleard (1990) found physical abuse occurring in 14 percent of caregivers
to Alzheimer’s disease patients in a respite care program. Given the preva-
lence findings of rates of physical abuse in the 1-3 percent range in the
general population, dementia patients would appear to be at greater risk of
such mistreatment.
     Second, a few studies have contrasted abusive and nonabusive care-
givers, examining dementia in the victim as one among a number of risk
factors. The results are contradictory. Lachs et al. (1994) did not find
cognitive impairment to be a risk factor, and Reis and Nahmiash (1998) did
not find dementia to discriminate between probable abuse and nonabuse
cases. However, Lachs et al. (1997a) found that dementia predicted identi-
fication as an abuse victim.
     One explanation for this contradictory set of findings comes from
94                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

Pillemer and Suitor’s (1992) finding that Alzheimer’s caregiver violence is
strongly related to experience of violence from the care recipient, and
Compton et al.’s (1997) finding that behavior problems are related to both
verbal and physical abuse. It may be that dementia itself is not the risk
factor, but rather disruptive behaviors that result from dementia. Such an
explanation would be consistent with research that has shown disruptive
behaviors by Alzheimer’s disease patients to be an especially strong cause of
caregiver stress. Future research of the relationship between dementia and
elder mistreatment should differentiate the cognitive, functional, and be-
havioral effects of dementia and examine the independent association be-
tween each and the risk for elder mistreatment.


                 Intraindividual Characteristics of Abusers
     Intraindividual theories of mistreatment locate the causes of abuse in
some pathological characteristic of the abuser, usually mental illness, per-
sonality characteristics, or alcohol or drug abuse. This approach has a
lengthy history in the study of child and intimate partner abuse, including a
long-standing debate over the role of intraindividual factors as risk factors
for the forms of mistreatment. In the field of elder mistreatment, there is
compelling evidence that certain characteristics of perpetrators constitute
major risk factors for elder mistreatment, with surprising unanimity on this
issue among studies using different methods.

Mental Illness
     Wolf and Pillemer (1989) found that 38 percent of abusers in three
related samples had a history of mental illness and 39 percent had alcohol
problems. Reis and Nahmiash (1998) attempted to validate a screening
tool using a sample of 341 agency cases in which caregivers could be
interviewed. The cases were classified as “likely” or “not likely” to involve
abuse of the care recipient. They found that the caregivers’ mental health
and behavior problems were strong predictors of likely abuse. Pillemer and
Finkelhor (1989) found in a case-comparison study that abusers were sub-
stantially more likely to have experienced psychiatric hospitalization than
nonabusers.
     These studies did not differentiate particular forms of mental illness.
Several studies have specifically pointed to depression as characteristic of
perpetrators of elder mistreatment. Paveza et al. (1992), in their study of
Alzheimer’s caregivers, found that caregiver depression predicted physical
abuse. Coyne et al. (1993) compared physically abusive and nonabusive
caregivers who called into a telephone helpline for family members of
Alzheimer’s disease patients; abusive caregivers were more depressed.
RISK FACTORS FOR ELDER MISTREATMENT                                        95

Homer and Gilleard (1990) found that among caregivers referred to a
respite service, abusive ones scored higher on a depression scale. In a recent
study, Williamson and Shaffer (2001) conducted structured interviews with
142 spousal caregivers regarding “potentially harmful behaviors”; these 10
items included verbal aggression, threats, and physical violence. Multivari-
ate analyses found that more depressed caregivers were also more likely to
treat their dependent spouses in potentially abusive ways. This finding is
also supported by Fulmer and Gurland (1996). Of course, it is possible that
depressed individuals may be more likely to report their own behavior as
abusive. All of these studies were retrospective; prospective research will be
needed to establish the causal direction.
    In the only study to distinguish between abuse types, Reay and Browne
(2001) found that physical abusers scored significantly higher on a depres-
sion scale than did perpetrators of neglect; thus, there may be a difference
by type of mistreatment, which needs to be assessed in future research.


Hostility
    A study of a sample of Alzheimer’s disease caregivers found that abu-
sive caregivers (a category that combined “emotional and/or physical
abuse”) scored higher on a hostility scale (Quayhagen et al., 1997).


Alcohol Abuse
     Several studies of elder mistreatment suggest that alcohol abuse on the
part of perpetrators was relatively common. For example, Greenberg and
colleagues (1990) reviewed 204 substantiated cases of elder abuse; 44 per-
cent were identified as having alcohol or drug abuse problems. Case-
control studies have supported this assertion, finding that elder mistreaters
were disproportionately more likely to be identified as having an alcohol
use problem (Bristowe and Collins; 1989; Homer and Gilleard, 1990; Wolf
and Pillemer, 1989).
     In a study funded by the National Institute on Aging that directly
addressed this issue, Anetzberger et al. (1994) compared a group of 23
adult children identified by agencies as perpetrators of domestic violence
against an elderly parent with a group of 39 nonviolent caregiving children.
Both alcohol use and abuse were more common among the perpetrators;
for example, daily alcohol consumption was more than twice as likely
among perpetrators.
     It is possible that the role of alcohol abuse may differ by abuse type.
Reay and Browne (2001) found that alcohol abuse by the caregiver (con-
sumption of over 21 units of alcohol per week) occurred in seven out of
nine of the physical abuse cases, but only one of the neglect cases.
96                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

                            Abuser Dependency
     Related to the previous risk factor, findings from early research on
elder mistreatment suggests that perpetrators tended to be dependent on the
individual they were mistreating. In 1982, Wolf and colleagues surveyed
community agencies in Massachusetts regarding elder abuse cases they had
encountered (Wolf et al., 1982). The authors identified a “web of mutual
dependency” between abuser and abused. In two-thirds of the cases in that
study, the perpetrator was reported to be financially dependent on the
victim. Another early study by Hwalek et al. (1984) also reported that
financial dependence on a relative was a risk factor in abuse. Other studies,
without control groups, have found substantial percentages of financially
dependent abusers (Anetzberger, 1987; Greenberg et al., 1990).
     A number of studies have confirmed this finding. Pillemer (1986; Wolf
and Pillemer, 1989) found that abusers were substantially more dependent
on the victim for housing and financial assistance than were members of a
comparison group. In Pillemer and Finkelhor’s (1989) analysis of cases
from a random-sample survey, nearly identical results emerged.


                       POSSIBLE RISK FACTORS

                                  Gender
    Adult protective services reports and other studies of agency samples
universally find that the majority of victims are female (Wolf, 1997b).
However, it is not clear whether this is due to higher risk for victimization
or to women’s greater numbers in the population of seniors. Pillemer and
Finkelhor’s (1988) survey suggested that the latter may be the case; in their
study, they found that the victimization rate for men was higher at 5.1
percent, compared with 2.5 percent for women. They attributed this in
part to the fact that elderly women are much more likely to live alone,
which reduces their risk. Furthermore, their sample included intimate part-
ner abuse among the well elderly, in which the victim would not necessarily
have been classified as vulnerable according to our definition.
    Pillemer and Finkelhor (1988) also noted the important caveat that
women tended to sustain more serious abuse and to suffer greater physical
and emotional harm from mistreatment. This may in turn explain their
greater representation as victims in adult protective services caseloads.


                   Relationship of Victim to Perpetrator
     Despite suggestions that adult children are the most likely perpetrators
of elder abuse, the only survey-based study of this topic found that spouses
RISK FACTORS FOR ELDER MISTREATMENT                                         97

were more likely to be abusers (Pillemer and Finkelhor, 1988). However,
there are insufficient data on this risk factor to make a determination.


                   Personality Characteristics of Victims
     Comijs et al. (1998) found that certain personality traits of elderly
persons increased their risk of being an abuse victim. In a community
survey conducted in the Netherlands, they examined whether hostility and
coping style were related to being a victim of chronic verbal aggression,
physical aggression, and financial mistreatment. Victims of chronic verbal
aggression scored lower on a locus of control scale than did the nonabused
members of the sample and higher on one indicator of hostility. Victims of
all three abuse types showed higher levels of aggression as measured by the
hostility scales and were generally more likely to use passive and avoidant
ways of coping, rather than active problem-solving strategies. Because of
the cross-sectional nature of this study, it is impossible to determine whether
these characteristics are indeed risk factors, or whether they are conse-
quences of the abuse. However, the findings are sufficiently suggestive to
merit further exploration of personality factors in longitudinal studies.


                                    Race
    Lachs and colleagues (1994, 1997a) found that being black was a risk
factor for reported elder mistreatment. However, they noted that this may
be an artifact of the definition of elder mistreatment, which was “being
reported to an [adult protective services] agency.” No other study has
found significant differences in elder abuse risk based on race.


                      CONTESTED RISK FACTORS

                 Physical Impairment of the Older Person
     The role of victim health and functional status as a risk factor for elder
abuse is a complex one. For the purposes of this report, some degree of
physical vulnerability is considered to be a necessary component of the
definition of elder mistreatment. That is, mistreatment necessarily implies a
weaker individual who is mistreated by a stronger one. Greater impairment
diminishes the individual’s ability to defend himself or herself or to escape
the situation. It therefore is reasonable to consider physical health prob-
lems as a predisposing factor for elder mistreatment, which increases the
likelihood of abuse in the presence of other risk factors.
     However, research has generally failed to find support for the view that
frailty of elderly persons is in itself a risk factor for elder mistreatment.
98                                                       ELDER MISTREATMENT

That is, case-control studies have not found a direct relationship between
elder mistreatment and functional impairment or poor health. Reis and
Nahmiash (1998) did not find impairment in activities of daily living to be
associated with elder abuse. Neither Cooney and Mortimer (1995), Paveza
et al. (1992), Bristowe and Collins (1989), nor Phillips (1983) in case-
comparison studies found functional impairment to be a risk factor for
abuse by caregivers. Lachs et al. (1997a) found that impairment in activi-
ties of daily living was associated with being an abuse victim, but the
researchers acknowledged that the dependent variable—protective services
intervention for elder abuse—may have led to these results, and that find-
ings may differ for elder mistreatment that is not detected by an agency.
     There is as yet no evidence as to whether this pattern of nonfindings
holds for all types of mistreatment. In the only study to address this issue
Wolf and Pillemer (1989) found that victims of elder neglect were more
likely to be impaired than victims of either physical or psychological abuse.


                  Victim Dependence and Caregiver Stress
     If there can be said to be a “traditional” view in the field of elder
mistreatment, then it can be summed up in the following way. Elderly
people become frail, difficult to care for, and sometimes demanding. These
characteristics cause stress for their caregivers; as a result of this stress, the
caregivers become abusive or neglectful toward the elder. In this view,
elder mistreatment is seen as an outgrowth of the aging process, which
leads to the need for care by others. Much early writing emphasized the
dependence of the elderly person and resulting caregiver stress as the pre-
dominant (and sometimes sole) cause of elder abuse (Davidson, 1979;
Hickey and Douglass, 1981; Steinmetz, 1988).
     However, there is a lack of evidence that an older person’s need for
assistance or that caregiver stress in fact lead to greater risk for elder
mistreatment. First, it is clear from the gerontological and geriatric litera-
ture that a substantial number of elderly persons are dependent on relatives
for some degree of care. However, findings about the prevalence of elder
mistreatment indicate that only a small minority of the elderly is mistreated.
Since abuse occurs in only a small proportion of families, no direct correla-
tion can be assumed between the dependence of an elderly person and
abuse, as sometimes has been done.
     Second, case-comparison studies have generally failed to find either
higher rates of elder dependence or greater caregiver stress in elder abuse
situations. Bristowe and Collins (1989), Homer and Gilleard (1990),
Phillips (1983), Pillemer (1985), Wolf and Pillemer (1989), Pillemer and
Finkelhor (1989), Pillemer and Suitor (1992), and Reis and Nahmiash
(1997) did not find greater dependence or caregiver stress among victims
RISK FACTORS FOR ELDER MISTREATMENT                                       99

and their family members, when compared with nonvictims. One excep-
tion, a study by Coyne et al. (1993), found that callers to a help line who
had committed abuse had been providing care for a longer time and for
more hours a day than nonabusers and had higher burden scores.


                      Intergenerational Transmission
    Social learning theory gives rise to the hypothesis that when individuals
experience violent behavior from parents or other role models in childhood,
they tend to revert to these learned behaviors when provoked as adults.
Indeed, it has by now become a commonplace that victims of child abuse
may grow up to themselves become child abusers, a pattern often described
as the “cycle of violence.” The cumulative research evidence supports this
hypothesis, with experiencing violence from parents or witnessing violence
between parents in childhood strongly related to perpetrating child or inti-
mate partner abuse (See Newberger, 1998; Stark and Flitcraft, 1998).
    Despite this evidence from other fields, the only two studies that have
addressed this issue (Anetzberger et al., 1994; Wolf and Pillemer, 1989)
found no evidence of intergenerational transmission of physical violence
against elderly relatives. This issue, however, is worthy of further study,
given the importance of childhood experience of aggression as a risk factor
for other forms of interpersonal violence. The importance of early child-
hood experiences of perpetrators as risk factors for types of elder mistreat-
ment other than physical violence should be explored. In addition, given
that in the elder mistreatment field the victim and perpetrator have been in
a long-standing personal relationship, as spouses or as parent and child, it
may be more important to assess the type of relationship between the
abuser and the victim as a risk factor for elder mistreatment.


     ELDER MISTREATMENT IN INSTITUTIONAL SETTINGS
     Despite the likelihood that elder mistreatment in nursing homes is
equally or more prevalent than abuse in domestic settings, only one study
has been conducted that specifically addressed risk factors. Pillemer and
Bachman-Prehn (1991) analyzed data from a survey of staff regarding self-
reported psychological and physical abuse. Predictors of psychological
abuse were staff burnout, experiencing physical aggression from residents,
negative attitudes toward residents, and age of the staff member, with
younger staff more likely to engage in psychological abuse. Risk factors for
physical abuse were again staff burnout and resident aggression, as well as
the reported amount of conflict with residents. This study is limited by the
self-report method used to assess the occurrence of elder mistreatment.
Self-report may be subject to bias, especially since the staff would often
100                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

have to report themselves or their colleagues as abusers, which may well
have affected ascertainment of occurrence of elder mistreatment.
     A number of other potential risk factors can be derived from the more
general literature on quality of care in nursing homes. Pillemer (1988)
proposed four sets of variables that may be related to maltreatment: exog-
enous factors (including the availability of nursing home beds and the
unemployment rate in an area); characteristics of the nursing home envi-
ronment (such as size, reimbursement rates, ownership status, staff-resident
ratio, and turnover rate); staff characteristics (including age, gender, educa-
tion level, and burnout), and resident characteristics (health and functional
status, social isolation, and gender). A full-scale test of this model remains
to be conducted.
     In her background paper for this panel, Hawes suggests risk factors
derived from surveys of stakeholders in long-term care. She proposes three
risk factors from these studies: stressful working conditions, particularly
resulting from staff shortages; staff burnout; and the joint effects of resident
aggression and poor training of staff in management of challenging behav-
iors. Pillemer (2001) combined insights derived from long-term care prac-
tice with the limited data on nursing home mistreatment to suggest four key
factors: poor hiring and staff screening practices; chronic staffing prob-
lems; lack of administrative and supervisory oversight; and inadequate train-
ing. Taken together, these approaches suggest a number of avenues for
studies of risk factors, at both the structural and the individual levels.

             CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
     Although risk factors at times are causes of mistreatment, this is not
always the case. Some risk factors (preferably called “risk indicators”) may
be “markers” for unmeasured/unobserved causes (confounders); or risk
factors may modify the relationship between causal factors and elder mis-
treatment (effect modifiers). For example, depression in a caregiver may be
a causal risk factor in that a depressed caregiver may be more likely to
neglect the care of an elder by virtue of the fatigue, social withdrawal, and
uninterest associated with depression. Living with others has been associ-
ated with an increased probability of mistreatment. However, this may not
be a direct causal relationship, because living with others is a contextual
factor in which mistreatment is more likely to occur; it would be possible to
reduce the risk of mistreatment by modifying other factors associated with
living with others and not changing the living circumstances of the older
person (which is often difficult and disruptive). To provide another ex-
ample, frailty—a form of vulnerability—may be an effect modifier, such as
at very high levels of frailty the probability of mistreatment may be much
RISK FACTORS FOR ELDER MISTREATMENT                                       101

higher than at lower levels of frailty. Further study of issues such as these
is absolutely critical to a research agenda on elder mistreatment.
     A research agenda for risk factor research on elder mistreatment is to
some degree straightforward, because it parallels our general recommenda-
tions for research on this topic. Studies using larger and more representa-
tive samples, as well as scientifically accepted epidemiological techniques,
must be conducted before risk factors can be more accurately specified.
The importance of case-control designs and cohort studies cannot be over-
emphasized. We do not reiterate all of these recommendations here.
     The following are specific additional recommendations to advance
knowledge of risk factors for elder mistreatment.

     1. Studies are urgently needed that examine risk and protective factors
for different types of elder mistreatment. Studies are needed to advance
understanding of what places older and vulnerable adults at risk for mis-
treatment and what places persons at risk for becoming abusive. These
studies can be carried out using well-established methods for determining
risk factors, including epidemiological case-control studies. These studies
must, however, use common measures that allow for comparison across
studies. Moreover, they must focus not only on the composite concept of
elder mistreatment, but also on its various forms.
     Intensification of epidemiological research to establish risk factors will
be facilitated by greater collaboration between researchers and the adult
protective services and elder services systems. Researchers in the field have
generally been hampered in their efforts to establish risk factors because
they have often needed to find both mistreatment cases and “controls” in
general population samples. Most retrospective epidemiological research
has used readily available case populations for studies, while attempting to
sample well-defined control groups. Many of the advances in understand-
ing risk factors associated with child abuse and intimate partner violence
occurred as the result of participation and engagement between the re-
search communities and the service provider agencies. In the panel’s view,
advances in risk-factor research in elder mistreatment will require coopera-
tion between adult protective services agencies and the research commu-
nity, such as exhibited in the work of Dyer and her colleagues in Texas. By
using persons clearly identified by some external source as victims of mis-
treatment, the focus can shift from concern about sample size to the identi-
fication of an appropriate group of controls.
     Such studies have the potential for providing vital information for both
policy makers and program developers to help define target behaviors for
intervention. In addition, this information can be used to develop profiles
of persons at risk for being mistreated, as well as to develop forensic mark-
102                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

ers. However, studies to identify protective factors from elder mistreatment
should not be neglected.
     2. A particularly critical need exists for studies of risk indicators and
risk and protective factors for elder mistreatment in institutional settings.
The available evidence reviewed by Hawes (this volume), combined with
extensive professional and public concern about serious quality problems
in long-term care (Institute of Medicine, 1996), suggests that a vast reser-
voir of undetected and unreported elder mistreatment in nursing homes
may exist. Because nursing home residents as a class are both extremely
physically vulnerable and generally unable either to protect themselves or
report elder mistreatment they experience, the physical and emotional
costs of elder mistreatment in such environments are likely to be very high.
Prevention programs exist (see Pillemer and Hudson, 1993), but they have
not been informed by rigorous risk factor research. Understanding the
causes of mistreatment of this extremely fragile population is of the highest
priority.
     3. Research on risk and protective factors should be expanded to take
into consideration the clinical course of elder mistreatment. Although
longitudinal data are absent, it seems probable that elder abuse situations
may follow a pattern similar to disease progression, which would include
lead time prior to the manifestation of active signs and symptoms of elder
mistreatment; periods of “remission” from elder mistreatment; and critical
points in which elder mistreatment becomes more intensive or acute. Some
have speculated that elder mistreatment typically increases in severity and
intensity over time (Breckman and Adelman, 1988), but no empirical data
exist that demonstrate this pattern or individual differences in progression.
Clinical accounts suggest that elder mistreatment situations include cases
that resolve on their own; cases in which mistreatment intensifies; and cases
in which the situation remains abusive but stable. It is therefore both
possible and important to identify risk factors for an increase or intensifica-
tion in elder mistreatment.
     For these reasons, cohort studies are of great importance in determin-
ing risk factors for elder mistreatment. Although prospective cohort studies
would be ideal, the lengthy period needed for cases of elder mistreatment to
develop is a deterrent. In the near term, retrospective cohort, or nested
case-control studies using established study populations may be preferable,
in which a preexisting data set is used and elder mistreatment measured at
a later point (the technique used by Lachs et al., 1994, 1997a). There are a
number of existing datasets involving elderly persons that could be used for
such a purpose (for example, existing panel studies of caregivers could be
assessed for incidence of elder mistreatment in a follow-up study).
     4. Advances in measurement in risk and protective factor research are
needed. The measurement of risk factors many times can be accomplished
RISK FACTORS FOR ELDER MISTREATMENT                                     103

adequately by importing measures for suspected risk factors from other
settings. For example, good measures exist in the literature for cognitive
impairment, dementia, handicap, and frailty. As well, some characteristics
of individuals that may place them at increased risk of mistreatment, such
as personality, stress, and the burden of caregiving, have been developed in
the child mistreatment field and could be adapted to this research setting.
For the most part, observational and hypothesis-driven research in the elder
mistreatment field will have to develop measures that are specific to the
field, such as measures of risk characteristics in trust relationships and
aspects of settings that may be of interest. This is in addition to adapting
measures of risk factors that have been developed in the child mistreatment
field and in other research.
                                     6

    Screening and Case Identification in
              Clinical Settings




                       E     lder mistreatment research must be conducted in
a variety of settings in order to maximize understanding and make it pos-
sible to take proper measures for prevention and management. These
settings include geographically defined communities and households, social
service agencies, the law enforcement and judicial systems, and the health
care system. Pertinent health service settings include all levels of primary,
secondary, and tertiary care, including long-term care institutions. While it
is important to understand the determinants and occurrence rates of elder
mistreatment through population-based studies, it is also critical to identify
victims in diverse settings where they frequently appear and where many of
the consequences of mistreatment are likely to be manifest.
     This chapter focuses on case ascertainment of elder mistreatment in the
clinical setting. The American Medical Association’s (AMA) Diagnostic
and Treatment Guidelines on Elder Abuse and Neglect (1992) urge “every
clinical setting” to utilize a protocol for the detection and assessment of
elder mistreatment, following a “routine pattern” in each case (see Figure
6-1). Implementation of such a structured protocol, however well inten-
tioned, could be costly and counterproductive in the absence of careful
planning. Since most older patients are not mistreated, and mistreatment is
probably uncommon in most general health service settings, any case ascer-
tainment method or program must be accurate and efficient, because it will
consume resources and have important consequences, especially if cases are
misclassified. Also, many health care delivery settings are so complex that
careful case ascertainment is difficult to achieve in practice.

                                    104
SCREENING AND CASE IDENTIFICATION IN CLINICAL SETTINGS                                                             105

                                                     Screening


   Mistreatment                                                                            Mistreatment not
   suspected                                                                               suspected




Report to adult protective
services and/or other public
agencies as mandated by your
states




 Is there an immediate                                                                  Discuss safety issues.
                                               Can full, private              No
 danger?                            No         assessment be done now?                  Schedule for full assessment, if
                                                                                        possible, in appropriate
                                                                                        (geriatric) assessment
               Yes                                                                      unit


                                                          Yes
  Create safety plan.
  Options include: hospital
  admissions, court protective order,
  safe home placement



     Assessment
    l   Safety                           l   Health and functional status          l   Frequency, severity, and intent
    l   Access                           l   Social and financial resources
    l   Cognitive status
    l   Emotional status




  Reason to believe
  that mistreatment has occurred;                                                        No mistreatment
  plan intervention                                                                      found




FIGURE 6-1 Diagnostic and treatment guidelines on elder abuse and neglect,
Part I.
SOURCE: American Medical Association (1992:13).


    Thus, research is needed to improve detection methods for elder mis-
treatment, particularly those that could lead to improved case management.
The benefits of careful case finding go beyond protecting the victim. Accu-
rate case identification can lead to rational resource allocation, creation
and funding of specialized services, and improved professional and public
education. Improving accuracy in case designation also has important
106                                                        ELDER MISTREATMENT

implications for the social service and criminal justice systems, particularly
in the areas of prevention and perpetrator prosecution. As noted in Chap-
ter 1 and in the paper by Wolfe (this volume), however, a preoccupation
with case identification can also have high costs; recent experience in child
abuse indicates that a single-minded emphasis on case investigation (when
accompanied by the threat of prosecution or other disruptive interventions)
can undermine the goal of protection.


A FRAMEWORK FOR ELDER MISTREATMENT SCREENING AND
               CASE IDENTIFICATION
    Several approaches are used to identify persons with important condi-
tions or situations in the clinical setting, and general principles have been
well developed (Rich and Sox, 2000; Neilsen and Lang, 1999). Figure 6-2
represents a framework for screening approaches, emphasizing that case
screening and investigation are parts of a multistage process, although the
nature and timing of each stage is varied. Validation of each step is an
important aim of research. A LEAD standard would be the appropriate
means of validating any proposed screening method prior to its widespread
application. Typically, the process of clinical screening and case identifica-
tion starts with designating appropriate settings and situations for carrying




                              1. Identify approach and
                              screening settings.



      Case registry:          2. Prescreening. (e.g.,               Clinical
      clinical, legal,        elder from a geographic               evidence or
      or social               area with high risk).                 suspicion of
      service data                                                  mistreatment
      source.

                              3. Screening.Test or
                              activity that defines high
                              risk.



                              4. Case investigation and
                              identification process.

FIGURE 6-2      A framework for clinical screening and case identification.
SCREENING AND CASE IDENTIFICATION IN CLINICAL SETTINGS                     107

out this important function. These may include emergency rooms, primary
care settings, social service agencies, and public health clinics; research on
the feasibility of other potential settings is indicated.


                            A Sequential Process
     As shown in Figure 6-2, prescreening may occur, formally or infor-
mally, through use of warning signs thought to signal an elevated risk, such
as being from a high-risk geographic area or having a certain cluster of
clinical symptoms or conditions or repeated admissions. To the extent that
clinicians rely on such a prescreening process, epidemiological research
could improve the accuracy and efficiency of the process by helping to
identify the warning signs. Another possible approach is the development
and use of case registries. Appearance in a data repository of persons who
have been suspected, evaluated, assessed and/or treated for elder mistreat-
ment through the health, social, or justice systems could be used as a basis
for initiating a more focused screening process.
     The next level is the screening process itself (Figure 6-2). This may take
many forms but most often has been based on short screening question-
naires (see detailed discussion below). Various approaches may be of value,
however, and the potential utility of different approaches to screening aside
from interviewing is an area in need of additional investigation. A critical
feature of the screening process is the cutoff point for deciding whether the
case is screened in or out; this task often involves considerable discretion,
highlighting the continuing tension between statistical and clinical methods
of screening. When the screening activity indicates a positive result, a case
identification investigation is initiated in order to definitively confirm or
refute the positive suspicion. While investigation of cases screened as posi-
tives is a general characteristic of screening programs, it is worth reiterating
that this can be a time-consuming and difficult process; screening programs
should be initiated cautiously (with a higher threshold of concern, for
example) if resources for case investigation are scarce. For those cases that
are identified after investigation, management programs and teams need to
be available to address the demands of the particular situation.


                    Statistical Approaches to Evaluation
     Standard statistical methods can be used to determine the accuracy of
screening tests, including any that could be explored for elder mistreatment.
Techniques include the use of such measures as sensitivity, specificity, pre-
dictive values of positive and negative tests, and receiver operator curves,
all available in standard references. For example, the proportion of pa-
tients with proven mistreatment who are designated as positive on the
108                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

screening test represents the sensitivity of that test. For that same test, the
predictive value of a positive test is the proportion of persons who screen
positive and have the condition being screened. This is not the same as
sensitivity, and both are important properties to understand. The propor-
tion of patients screened negative for mistreatment who have not been
mistreated represents the specificity of the method; highly specific tests
correctly identify those people who do not have the condition. While a
detailed discussion of these measures is beyond the scope of this chapter, it
should be noted that variation in screening test application, target condi-
tions, and condition occurrence may alter the measurement properties of a
given screening test.
      These methods are more readily applied to conditions that can defi-
nitely be designated as being present or absent. For example, a clinical
outcome such as a cancer, high blood pressure, or high blood cholesterol
can be reliably determined in most circumstances, and the properties of
screening tests are well understood. As long as researchers utilize the same
cutoff points, outcomes can be compared across studies and conclusions
based on data drawn from many studies may be reached in a reliable
manner. However, the manifestations of elder mistreatment may be varied,
depending on the type of victim and perpetrator and the social context.
This variation in disease outcome across study settings may decrease the
generalizability of screening test findings. Even with attempts at uniform
case definitions, such as that used by Dolan and Blakely (1989:33) to
describe elder neglect (“a pattern of conduct which deprives another person
of the minimum amount of care which is necessary to maintain physical
and mental health”), the definition may be interpreted in myriad ways.
Each researcher’s interpretation of phrases such as “pattern of conduct”
and “minimum amount of care” will be different and hard to operationalize.
It is thus extremely important that researchers explicitly and carefully state
their operational definition of elder mistreatment when developing screen-
ing tools and assessing their accuracy.


                                SCREENING

                          Approaches to Screening
    As noted above, although little research has been done in most of these
areas, several approaches to screening and prescreening are possible: short
questionnaires, geographic characteristics, the presence of certain types or
patterns of injuries, clinical or research biomarkers, lack of adherence to or
success with various medical regimens, unusual behavioral manifestations,
or a history of prior victimization, either recent or remote (Bowen, 2000).
Automated medical record systems may be developed that could flag cer-
SCREENING AND CASE IDENTIFICATION IN CLINICAL SETTINGS                   109

tain patients who are at increased risk of mistreatment based on validated
indicators and formulas. These are all in need of further exploration.
Research is also needed on the best ways to verify and manage situations in
which patients spontaneously report possible episodes of mistreatment.
Many health centers have domestic abuse detection and management sys-
tems in place, providing an important opportunity for clinical research on
elder mistreatment.
     As noted, most efforts to screen elder mistreatment in the clinical set-
ting have involved short, directly administered questionnaires. For ex-
ample, the AMA guidelines (American Medical Association, 1992) encour-
age physicians to “incorporate routine questions related to elder abuse and
neglect into daily practice.” Table 6-1 contains a listing of published
screening methods for elder mistreatment, along with information on their
measurement properties. While several screening tools are now available to
identify possible cases of elder mistreatment, it is not known if these tools
are widely utilized; anecdotal evidence indicates they are not. Most emer-
gency rooms, one logical place to institute screening procedures, do not
routinely screen for elder mistreatment (Jones et al., 1997). The existing
tools have rarely been validated in diverse clinical settings, and they have
not been adequately validated overall. Some have been evaluated in the
emergency room setting, others in the home setting, but none in the office,
nursing home, or community settings (such as senior centers or adult day
care programs). Several of the current tools depend on accurate responses
from the possible victim, who may be unable to give reliable answers due to
dementia, fear, or other cognitive or emotional factors. Others depend on
responses from the caregiver or trusted other, who may not be willing to
provide accurate, truthful responses or may be incapable of doing so. The
caregivers of many frail and dependent elders may themselves be equally
frail and impaired (Schultz and Beach, 1999).
     Even among published screening tools, improvements in design and
measurement properties may be indicated. There is also need for extending
screening instruments into a wider range of settings, such as the physician’s
office, adult day care programs, and, despite the challenges, long-term care
facilities. These instruments must be practical for those settings. While
some of the existing instruments have been available for many years, few
have received confirmatory validation by other investigators. Because some
cases of mistreatment are obvious and overt, testing the current screening
tools to see if they correctly identify these cases may be a reasonable start-
ing point. Once we know that the clear-cut cases are identifiable, it should
be easier to proceed to the gray areas where many cases of possible mis-
treatment lie.
     In order for a screening tool to be practical in a clinical setting, it
should not only be accurate, but also easy to use and efficient. Some of
110                                                         ELDER MISTREATMENT

TABLE 6-1 Maltreatment Screening Instruments
Instrument and                                            Type of
Citation                     Purpose                      Elder Maltreatment         Evaluation

BASE                         5 items                      Physical, psychological,   Reis et al.
The Brief Abuse Screen                                    neglect, financial
for the Elderly              Trained practitioner                                    Paper pres
                             evaluation of caregiver                                 the Canad
Reis et al. (1993)           and elder.                                              Associatio
                                                                                     Gerontolo
                             To help the practitioner
                             assess the likelihood of
                             abuse.



IOA                          29 items                     Physical, psychological,   Reis and N
Indicators of Abuse Screen                                neglect                    (1998)
                             Trained practitioner
Reis and Nahmiash (1998)     assessment of caregiver
                             and elder.

                             To enable practitioners to
                             identify abuse cases among
                             health and social services
                             agency clients.




H-S/EAST                     15 items                     Physical, psychological,   Hwalek an
Hwalek-Sengstock Elder                                    financial                  Sengstock
Abuse Screening Test-        Elder as respondent.
Revised                      To help agencies identify
                             situations likely to be or
                             become abusive or
Hwalek and Sengstock         neglectful.
(1986)



                                                                                     Moody et
                                                                                     (2000)
        SCREENING AND CASE IDENTIFICATION IN CLINICAL SETTINGS                              111



                             Validation               Validation             Reliability
t       Evaluation           Method                   Setting                Estimates

ical,   Reis et al. (1993)   Face Validity            Home assessment of Not analyzed
                                                      health and social
        Paper presented at   86-90% agreement         services agency cases.
        the Canadian         by 3 different trained
        Association on       practitioners.
        Gerontology




ical,   Reis and Nahmiash    Construct Validity       Home assessment of     Chronbach’s
        (1998)                                        341 health and         alpha = 0.91
                             The performance of       social services
                             the IOA was              agency cases (55
                             evaluated against        and older).
                             the BASE measure.
                             Scores of 16 and
                             above have a
                             sensitivity of 85% and
                             a specificity of 99%.




ical,   Hwalek and           Predictive Validity      97 social-health       Not analyzed
        Sengstock (1986)     services cases.          100 elders living in
                                                      public housing
                             Using known abuse
                             cases and control
                             cases, 9 items were
                             94 % accurate in
                             classifying cases into
                             abuse and nonabuse
                             cases.

        Moody et al.         Predictive Validity
        (2000)
                             Using known abuse/
                             nonabuse cases,
                             discriminate function
                             analysis showed that
                             6 items were as
                             effective as the 9-item
                             model in classifying
                             cases (71.4%) as abused.
                                                                         continued on next page
112                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT


TABLE 6-1 Continued
Instrument and                                        Type of
Citation                 Purpose                      Elder Maltreatment          Evaluation


EAI                      35 items                     Abuse, neglect,             Fulmer an
Elder Assessment                                      exploitation, abandonment   O’Malley
Instrument (revised)     Caregiver as respondent.

Fulmer et al. (2000)     To identify individuals at
                         high risk of mistreatment
                         who should be referred for
                         further assessment.

CASE                     8 items specifically worded Physical, psychological,     Reis and N
Caregiver Abuse Screen   to be nonblaming.           neglect                      (1995)

Reis and Namiash         Filled out by caregiver.
(1995)
                         To identify caregivers who
                         are more likely to be
                         abusers.




those published, such as the Hwalek-Sengstock Elder Abuse Screening Test
and the Elder Assessment Instrument, require referral to a more specialized
assessment process. Often, no well-established or specialized assessment
process is available in many clinical settings; putative cases are reported to
the community adult protective systems, which may vary in assessment
rigor and standardization, adding to the challenge of screening instrument
evaluation. This referral and evaluation process could be another direction
for research on the screening process for elder mistreatment.
     Another important challenge is the design and validation of new instru-
ments and approaches to detect the various types of elder mistreatment in
addition to overt physical abuse in the home, particularly abuse in the
institutional setting, intentional neglect, and financial abuse. While these
types of mistreatment may overlap, it is likely that different markers will be
             SCREENING AND CASE IDENTIFICATION IN CLINICAL SETTINGS                           113



                                 Validation             Validation             Reliability
t            Evaluation          Method                 Setting                Estimates


             Fulmer and          Content validity:      Acute care.            Chronbach’s
    onment   O’Malley (1987)     0.83                                          alpha = 0.84




ical,        Reis and Namiash    Predictive Validity    44 known abusive       Chronbach’s
             (1995)                                     caregivers and 45      alpha = 0.71
                                 Using known            nonabusive
                                 abusers and a          caregivers receiving
                                 control groups,        care from a social
                                 overall scores of      services center.
                                 abusers were
                                 significantly higher
                                 on the CASE (mean
                                 3.2) than nonabusers
                                 (mean 1.9).

                                 Construct Validity

                                 CASE scores were
                                 positively correlated
                                 (0.41) with IOA scores.




             present in the domains of subject, trusted other, and social embeddedness
             (see Chapter 3).


                                        Challenges in Screening
                 A variety of factors make screening challenging and difficult. Mistreat-
             ment may occur as a single act or as a chronic, subtle series of events. In
             fact it is often difficult to know when an event or series of events have
             crossed the line from inappropriate conduct to actual mistreatment. At
             what point does inadequate care become intentional neglect? Expectations
             across different settings may also influence the identification and definition
             of cases. For example, different standards of care may be applied to the
             professional staff of a nursing home in contrast to a family caregiver or
114                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

volunteer in-home helpers. In addition, common physiological changes in
the elderly complicate the assessment of elder mistreatment. Bruises and
fractures and even death may be indicators of abusive assaults, but they are
also common occurrences in frail and dependent elders due to spontaneous
falls and tissue fragility. How do we know when a bruise is an indicator of
abuse rather than an expected result of a person’s medical condition and
functional status?
     As is evident throughout this report, the context in which an injury
occurs is often as important as the injury itself in screening for elder mis-
treatment. Instruments for screening and case identification would be likely
to benefit from considering contextual risk factors as well as characteristics
of the elder subject and characteristics of the trusted other. As an example,
the places where elders reside and spend time may affect the risk for mis-
treatment. For those living in a skilled nursing facility or who are house-
bound, residential or institutional risk factors take on greater importance.
Others may spend time in a variety of settings, such as senior centers or
adult day care centers. The varied distribution of social environments may
alter risk profiles and the performance of screening instruments. The socio-
cultural milieu in which elder mistreatment occurs is another potentially
important contextual issue that has received little research attention. Un-
derstanding how variations in race, ethnicity, religious beliefs, and socio-
economic status affect the risk and occurrence of elder mistreatment is
critical to improving screening and case identification methods.
     Further complicating screening and case identification of elder mis-
treatment is the problem of cognitive impairment. Depending on the degree
of impairment, different methods may be employed to elicit needed infor-
mation. Some with mild impairment may be able to give a reasonably
accurate history of neglect or abuse, but those with moderate or severe
dementia may not be able to do so (see further discussion of this issue
below). There is good evidence that mistreatment is a substantial problem
among Alzheimer’s disease patients (Paveza et al., 1992). Screening and
diagnosis must then be done via interviews of caregivers or others who are
knowledgeable about the elder’s situation and via clinical evaluation of the
patient. Screening the trusted other in these circumstances is an important
research direction as environmental and social factors in elder mistreatment
are ascertained.


                         CASE IDENTIFICATION
    As emphasized throughout in this volume, the range of behaviors sub-
sumed under elder mistreatment is large, diverse, and multidimensional.
While some cases are obvious and easy to designate, many are not, and the
definitions of elder mistreatment should be the subject of research, as noted
SCREENING AND CASE IDENTIFICATION IN CLINICAL SETTINGS                     115

in Chapter 2. That chapter also discusses use of the LEAD standard meth-
odology to validate case identification methods. In addition, the clinical
process of case investigation in the community practice setting has substan-
tial implications for the social service (adult protective services) and justice
systems. The Adult Protective Services experience is of particular interest.
In a survey (National Association of Adult Protective Services Administra-
tors) for 1999–2000 in which all 50 states responded, of the complaints
received by adult protective services, only two-thirds were investigated. Of
those investigated, half were substantiated for abuse or neglect. While the
complaints and investigative processes are tracked by every state, the meth-
ods of case validation preceding the finding varies widely from state to
state.
     The starting point for adult protective services response to a complaint
of alleged elder mistreatment is the state statute and administrative rules. A
total of 26 states respond to complaints for people age 60 years and older,
and 18 states respond to complaints for people age 65 and older. Two
states include any adult who is vulnerable or has disabilities. As discussed
earlier, state statutes also differ significantly in their definitions. For ex-
ample, some statutes do not cover neglect.
     If the complaint received by adult protective services meets the local
statutory definitions, a caseworker is assigned to assess or investigate the
situation, determine if the abuse is substantiated, and develop a plan to
protect the person from further harm. The assessment-investigation pro-
cess is often identified by adult protective services workers as one of the
most difficult aspects of their work. There is a paucity of training for them
prior to receiving a caseload, with only a handful of states requiring signifi-
cant training. In addition, states differ in their emphasis on case identifica-
tion versus provision of social services. Some states are more weighted
toward investigation, that is, the process of making a finding about the
allegation and abuse registries, while others spend more time on the provi-
sion of services and less on investigating.
     Once a case of elder mistreatment has been assigned for investigation,
most state statutes require a face-to-face visit with the alleged victim within
a prescribed time period, more quickly depending on the seriousness of the
report, but typically within 48 hours. Once at the home or residence, in the
majority of instances, the adult protective services worker must first receive
consent of the client for the assessment-investigation. If the client refuses,
the worker cannot proceed. When conducting an assessment-investigation,
the worker’s task is not only to find out what happened and determine if it
was abuse or neglect, but it may also include an evaluation of the person’s
functional capacity, and his/her ability to live independently (physical tasks)
and to make judgments (mental tasks). This knowledge helps to determine
what support should be offered so that the person can live as independently
as possible, and it is also useful in determining their ability to protect
116                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

themselves from further harm. The assessment should also include evalua-
tion of the risk of future abuse.
     While adult protective services units have developed several instru-
ments and guidelines to carry out their state mandate—for example, screen-
ing, investigation and evaluation of mental competence—and have shared
best practices among the states, they are well aware of the need for valida-
tion and research and of the subjective nature of the decision making often
required in conducting assessments-investigations. The processes of case
identification and case management are in need of research for all of its
components. Some of the major challenges for both the clinical and com-
munity settings are discussed below.


                Standardized Criteria for Case Identification
      A major barrier to the identification of cases of elder mistreatment is
that the researcher or clinician is rarely in a position to directly observe the
relevant event(s). Most of the time, the identification of a case is made
indirectly, relying on the report of the victim—or the perpetrator—or on
the presence or absence of observable signs and symptoms believed to be
indicative of mistreatment, such as emotional distress or bruises. However,
indirect approaches may be uncertain. The accuracy of self-report by vic-
tims or perpetrators is not quantitatively established in most clinical set-
tings. The value of self-report may be further undermined when the victim
is ill or cognitively impaired.
      The capacity of older persons to provide accurate accounts of their
observations or experiences is an important area for research. In many
situations, case identification is predicated largely on the injured person’s
account of the circumstances. Whether adult protective services or a pros-
ecutor acts on the possible mistreatment is dependent in such an instance on
the credibility of the victim.
      If an allegation is brought, whether a court even hears the injured
person’s account may be dependent on a finding of his or her competence to
testify. If the older person has cognitive impairments, then the admissibility
of his or her testimony may be contingent on judicial findings that the
witness had the ability to form a “just impression of the facts” (i.e., to
perceive the situation) at the time that the injury occurred, that the witness
has the ability to recall the situation and communicate that memory, that
the witness understands the difference between truth and falsity, and that
the witness knows the nature of an oath and understands the obligation to
tell the truth in court (see Myers, 1993).
      Ultimately, the application of these standards arguably depends on an
assessment of the jury’s ability to make sense of the witness’s testimony.
Given that time will be consumed in any event by a determination of a
witness’s competence, the victim’s testimony should be heard if it is not
SCREENING AND CASE IDENTIFICATION IN CLINICAL SETTINGS                       117

likely to mislead or confuse the jury. In such a case, however, the jury still
has to consider the witness’s credibility, and expert opinions may be intro-
duced about the possible effects of the witness’s cognitive impairments
(Melton et al., 1997, § 7.07).
     There is now a large body of research on children’s credibility and
competence as witnesses. Many studies have addressed child witnesses’
suggestibility and accuracy of recall (see Saywitz et al., 2002). Extension of
this research to elders with dementia poses significant challenges, because
the impact of the impairments to statements about victimization will be
affected by medications, comorbidities, the experience of trauma, and the
severity of the dementia itself. However, some of the methods used in
research on child witnesses could be applied in studies of testimony by
mildly or moderately confused elders.
     Research assessing the capacity of older persons with cognitive impair-
ments to provide accurate testimony is needed for improving the accuracy
of case identification, not only in clinical settings, but also in legal settings,
including prosecutorial decision making and formal adjudication.
     Another impediment to accurate case identification is that many elders
have conditions that are associated with physical frailty and other medical
problems as well as psychological or emotional problems. For example, as
many as 18 percent of seniors report depressive symptoms (although many
of these are mild symptoms)—much higher than can be accounted for by
mistreatment alone. Also, normal age-related changes make an elder more
susceptible to serious consequences of seemingly minor illnesses. An older
person with atrial fibrillation taking an anticoagulant may have easy skin
bruising, and thus the presence of bruising will be less helpful than other-
wise as a sign of possible mistreatment. This “fact” is clinically accepted
and makes intuitive sense, yet no studies quantify bruising rates under
normal circumstances, compared with cases of mistreatment. Fragile capil-
laries and thinner skin, both age-related changes, also make elderly indi-
viduals more susceptible to bruising. Quantification and standardization of
mistreatment-related clinical observations are necessary to explore their
utility in designating cases of mistreatment. Because so little is known
about the signs and symptoms of mistreatment, it is easy to assume that an
injury is due to a certain constellation of natural changes and illnesses
rather than to mistreatment. There are no studies that help illuminate when
to consider an injury as a marker of mistreatment. Retrospective studies
may be a valuable tool in understanding markers, particularly in cases of
ongoing abuse. If elders with severe injuries secondary to mistreatment are
identified, one may be able to look at their histories and see if there were
markers that would have made it possible to identify mistreatment at an
earlier stage.
     A critical step to advance the field is the development of a consensus
around the determination of whether or not a case of mistreatment has
118                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

occurred. Since elder mistreatment is almost always assessed by indirect
means, a gold standard of case identification may not yet be possible.
Investigators will need to create new approaches to case standardization
and develop alternative benchmarks for case identification. One useful
approach discussed in Chapter 2, applies the LEAD (longitudinal, expert,
all data) standard. This method must be well described, widely accepted,
and replicable in a variety of settings in which mistreatment might be
encountered.


                  Applying Causal Logic to Case Finding
    In addition to the determination of relevant conduct and harm, the
occurrence of mistreatment requires a determination of cause, especially in
studies aiming to improve clinical methods of case identification and screen-
ing. In some cases the co-occurrence of harm and relevant conduct is such
that an unequivocal determination that the perpetrator’s conduct caused
the harm can be made. For example, a caregiver might be observed striking
an elder. In many situations, however, the critical issue is whether the
observed harm suffered by the victim was attributable to the trusted other’s
conduct. (As noted in Chapter 2, in some circumstances there is conduct of
interest but no evidence of harm. The issue of causality is not relevant in
such cases, unless there is concern that harm has not been detected, in
which case the problem involves the detection of consequences.)
    Determination of cause is most relevant in two types of situations. In
one type, consequence and conduct could both be detected but neither
alone would constitute mistreatment, unless the conduct was shown to
have caused the consequence. This scenario is most relevant to neglect. For
example, an older person might have fallen and fractured her hip at the
same time that the caregiver was known to leave her alone at home for
several hours during the day. If the elder had a problem walking and
always needed help to get around, it might be concluded that the lack of
supervision was critical to the older person’s fall and thus constituted mis-
treatment. In contrast, if the elder had no problems walking and fell
because she rushed to go downstairs to answer the phone, the caregiver’s
conduct would not constitute mistreatment.
    Applying causal reasoning that meets research standards to this sort of
circumstance is clearly complex. While logical inference is critical to deter-
mine whether certain prerequisites are met (e.g., “Did the conduct occur
before the consequence?” or “Was the conduct such that the specific conse-
quence would be expected to have resulted from it?”), ultimately, the deter-
mination of causality may often be judgmental, requiring a process by
which the determination can be made. This decision process itself may be
the object of important research and at a minimum should have high face
SCREENING AND CASE IDENTIFICATION IN CLINICAL SETTINGS                     119

validity and reliability and be sufficiently delineated so that it can be repli-
cated.
    The other situation in which causal reasoning could be called on is one
in which a harm has been detected without a clear conduct that could have
caused it. While this too could be considered a failure in the measurement
of conduct, some research indicates that there are certain harms that older
persons may suffer that can only have been by mistreatment (or have a such
high probability of having been caused by mistreatment that they are pre-
sumed to be due to mistreatment until proven otherwise). An example of
such a presumed case would be the presence of a clinical phenomenon that
could only have occurred by the conduct of another person.


            Identifying Physical Markers of Elder Mistreatment
    Some physical findings in children, such as shaken baby syndrome, are
considered to be hallmarks of abuse. Characteristic injuries in this syn-
drome include retinal hemorrhages, subdural hematomas, and rib or long
bone fractures. Are there similar hallmarks that may comprise a syndrome
of physical abuse or neglect in the elderly? Possible examples discussed by
Dyer et al. (this volume) include lacerations of specific body parts, certain
types of burns, dehydration in certain contexts, and possibly specific types
of bone fractures. Further clinical, behavioral, and forensic research in this
area is needed to determine what harms under what circumstances would
constitute almost unequivocal evidence of having been caused by the con-
duct (acts or omissions) of another person.
    There are to our knowledge no published studies of physical markers of
elder mistreatment that help distinguish preventable, unavoidable signs from
those that are intentional, inflicted, or avoidable. One study of skin tears in
nursing home residents described the characteristics of the tears, but almost
half (48 percent) of the tears had an unknown cause, and the possibility of
mistreatment was not addressed (Malone et al., 1991). The only study on
bruising that included elderly subjects did not address the influence of
medications, functional status, illnesses, or living situation, nor did it ad-
dress etiology (Langlois and Gresham, 1991).
    Possible markers of neglect and abuse include bruises, pressure sores,
fractures, burns, and abrasions. A key to interpretation of these markers is
not merely their presence but their characteristics—such as anatomic loca-
tion, extent, morphology, severity, and multiplicity—which may help dif-
ferentiate between an intentional injury and an avoidable one. For ex-
ample, a single bruise on the back of the forearm is probably common in
cases of accidental bruising, but multiple bruises in various stages of healing
on the neck, anterior upper arm, and abdomen raise a suspicion of physical
abuse. Also, it is not known if hip fractures due to spontaneous falls have
120                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

a different radiographic appearance than those due to an inflicted injury.
Research is needed to help illuminate the characteristics of common inju-
ries, such as their etiology, natural course, distribution, and severity so that
the process of identifying cases of elder mistreatment can become more
accurate and reliable. While certain physical signs (such as burns and
ligature marks) are likely to be more reliable indicators of elder mistreat-
ment than others (such as fractures and pressure sores), neither the chal-
lenge nor the importance of advancing knowledge in this area should be
underestimated. Mistakenly characterizing a spontaneous bruise or other
injury as intentionally inflicted may lead to substantial clinical, social, and
legal jeopardy for all concerned.


                              CONCLUSIONS
     The need for accurate and efficient screening and case identification
methods for elder mistreatment is immense. We must minimize false nega-
tives to protect the elder subject and minimize the false positives to avoid
false accusations of the trusted other. Just as mistreatment can have devas-
tating consequences for an elder, a false accusation can have devastating
consequences for the trusted other. It is likely that screening and case
identification will hinge on understanding the constellation and interaction
of signs, symptoms, findings, and the context in which they occur.
     Substantial research is needed to improve and develop new methods of
screening for possible elder mistreatment in a range of clinical settings.
These methods should be able to detect a broad range of categories of
mistreatment and be highly accurate and efficiently deployed. Candidate
techniques include improved questionnaire designs; record linkage to other
clinical, public health, social and legal databases; automated alerts based on
concurrent clinical records; and previously defined risk status based on
prescreening methods. Special attention should be placed on the predictive
value of various clinical injuries and other relevant clinical findings as
indicators of mistreatment for therapeutic, social, and forensic reasons.
Also, the panel sees value in economic analyses of cost-effectiveness for
elder mistreatment screening in various clinical settings.
     Research is needed on the process of designating cases as incidents of
mistreatment in order to improve criteria, investigative methods, decision-
making processes, and decision outcomes. The absence of a gold standard
for case identification, and the momentous consequences of inaccurate de-
cisions, highlight the need for studying and improving the process of case
investigation and designation. The impact of resource constraints on the
designation process and its consequences for affected persons should also
be studied.
                                       7


                Evaluating Interventions




                       I  n this chapter we discuss policies and programs
designed to protect older persons from mistreatment and to ensure their
safety. Overall, the panel’s conclusions can be easily summarized: no
efforts have yet been made to develop, implement, and evaluate interven-
tions based on scientifically grounded hypotheses about the causes of elder
mistreatment, and no systematic research has been conducted to measure
and evaluate the effects of existing interventions.
    Mandatory reporting and interventions by adult protective services, the
core elements of the current system for preventing and ameliorating elder
mistreatment, have never been subjected to a rigorous evaluation. Nor
have most other interventions targeted at preventing elder mistreatment or
addressing the needs of victims and abusers. While intervention programs
are presented at national and regional meetings, these programs have not
been subjected to systematic evaluation. Without rigorous evaluation, re-
ports of these programs are usually not accepted for publication. More-
over, lack of systematic evaluation can result in the duplication of programs
in which the benefits of the program, if there are any, are attributable to the
characteristics of the agency that carried it out, rather than the effects of the
intervention itself. A secondary result of such duplication is the investment
of resources, both public and private, for programs that have never been
shown to work and that may be ineffective. This inevitably reduces the
funding for new innovations.
    The chapter briefly surveys existing interventions to highlight several
important research opportunities. Mandatory reporting requirements are

                                      121
122                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

discussed first, since they lie at the center of current policy. The chapter
then addresses community-based interventions—focusing on adult protec-
tive services, the health and criminal justice systems, and emerging ex-
amples of collaborative programs—before turning to mistreatment in insti-
tutional settings.


                REPORTING ELDER MISTREATMENT
     Reporting of suspected elder mistreatment is the most commonly used
and most controversial intervention. The adult protection statutes of all
states and the District of Columbia include provisions governing the report-
ing of suspected elder mistreatment. All but six of those jurisdictions
mandate reporting of suspected mistreatment by specified categories of
persons. The other six states—Colorado, New Jersey, New York, North
Dakota, South Dakota, and Wisconsin—permit reporting but do not re-
quire it. In general, reports are to be made to the pertinent adult protective
services agency; in some jurisdictions, however, reporters may be required
to transmit their suspicions to a law enforcement agency or some other type
of organization in lieu of or in addition to adult protective services.
     According to a statutory analysis conducted by the American Bar Asso-
ciation Commission on Legal Problems of the Elderly (through December
2001), in eight of the mandatory reporting states (Delaware, Indiana, Ken-
tucky, New Mexico, North Carolina, Rhode Island, Texas, and Wyoming),
“any person” who suspects mistreatment is required to report it. In the
other jurisdictions, the reporting obligation is directed to various occupa-
tional and professional groups. However, nine of those states take a hybrid
approach, requiring “any person” and members of specific occupations to
report, depending on the circumstances. In all, 14 states list between 1 and
10 categories, 9 states list between 11 and 20, and 14 states list 21 or more.
The occupations and professions commonly mandated to report include:

   •    Health care professionals
   •    Mental health professionals
   •    Caregivers (whether paid or unpaid)
   •    Home care providers
   •    Employees of nonresidential programs for the elderly
   •    Employees of sheltered workshops and similar nonresidential pro-
grams
   •    Employees of residential facilities for the elderly
   •    Social workers
   •    Long-term care ombudsman program staff and volunteers
   •    Employees of adult protective services programs
EVALUATING INTERVENTIONS                                                123

    •    Employees of area agencies on aging and other aging service pro-
viders
    •    Employees of human services, social services, or health depart-
ments
    •    Law enforcement and public safety employees
    •    Attorneys
    •    Guardians and conservators
    •    Teachers and educators
    •    Financial profession employees

     The concept of mandatory reporting of suspected mistreatment was
borrowed from the child abuse laws without research demonstrating its
applicability to older persons. The ongoing debate concerning mandated
reporting raises many empirical questions about the effects of these laws on
the behavior of mandated reporters and about the consequences of report-
ing on the lives of people affected by them. Yet virtually no research has
been conducted on these important issues. For example, to what extent are
mandated reporters aware of their legal obligations? To what extent do
they comply with them? What factors affect reporting behavior? What are
the motivations, concerns, and expectations of those who report and those
who decline to do so? Does reporting behavior vary significantly among
the professions and occupations required to report under state law? Hawes
(this volume) discusses some studies indicating significant underreporting
of elder mistreatment by physicians and other health care professionals,
long-term care ombudsmen, and residents of long-term care facilities and
their family members. The panel is not aware of studies of other profes-
sions or occupations. There is much anecdotal evidence of underreporting,
but systematic study of reporting behavior is needed—not only to assess
compliance but also to provide the necessary foundation for critical evalu-
ation of the effects of mandated reporting.
     Many questions have been raised about the effects of mandated report-
ing. What actually happens as a consequence of a report, compared with
informal interventions that might otherwise have occurred? What are the
consequences (both positive and negative) of being reported on the lives of
the victim, the perpetrator, and the family? To what extent does the threat
of being reported (and the ensuing intervention) affect the behavior of
potential (or previously reported) perpetrators and victims? These impor-
tant issues can be addressed in well-designed studies comparing responses
to suspected mistreatment in jurisdictions with and without mandatory
reporting. The fact that six states do not require reporting affords an
unusual opportunity for cross-jurisdictional comparisons. Before-and-after
designs may also be possible as some of the six states with voluntary report-
124                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

ing schemes consider adopting mandatory reporting and other jurisdictions
reevaluate their existing reporting requirements.
     The panel strongly recommends systematic studies of reporting prac-
tices and the effects of reporting, taking maximum advantage of the oppor-
tunity for comparisons of practices and outcomes in states with and with-
out mandated reporting.


                    ADULT PROTECTIVE SERVICES
    Adult protective services agencies are the backbone of community-
based efforts to respond to elder mistreatment. Statutes require every state
to respond to reports of abuse of vulnerable adults. The laws generally
establish a system for reporting and investigation of alleged abuse or ne-
glect and for providing protective services to help the victim and ameliorate
the abuse. Most laws pertain to adults who have a disability, vulnerability,
or impairment that reduces their capacity to protect themselves. All states
include the elderly population that may be eligible by virtue of age or age in
combination with disability (see Chapter 2 and Appendix B).
    The important, and sometimes exclusive, role of adult protective ser-
vices in responding to reports of abuse and neglect warrants closer exami-
nation. After receiving a report, adult protective services serve three main
functions. The first organizational function is to receive, assess, and triage
abuse and neglect reports. The initial response includes screening the re-
port to evaluate its fit with the applicable abuse and neglect definition.
Once a referral is accepted, most states require a response within 24 hours.
Many offices have crisis intervention services available through a hotline or
on-call system so that an initial determination can be made about the need
for emergency services and referrals to other services or providers.
    A face-to-face visit with the alleged victim is required in most states.
This often includes an assessment of risk (of further abuse) along with an
assessment of cognitive ability and the ability of a person to function inde-
pendently. Although three states (Arizona, Delaware, and Louisiana) use
risk assessment tools for which there is some evidence of reliability and
validity, the instruments being used in about one-third of the states have
not been tested for reliability or validity. The risk assessment instruments
in use evaluate client and environmental factors, availability and adequacy
of support services, current and historical abuse factors and perpetrator
factors. As discussed in Chapter 6, the utility of screening instruments is an
important area for research. With regard to adult protective services screen-
ing in particular, the panel recommends studies tracking samples of indi-
viduals excluded or included for further action.
    After providing any needed emergency services, the second function of
adult protective services is to investigate abuse or neglect reports. Agencies
EVALUATING INTERVENTIONS                                                  125

differ in their approach to finding out whether abuse or neglect occurred.
Some are heavily investigative, and others focus on providing social ser-
vices. Some rely exclusively on law enforcement to conduct investigations.
The balance between investigation and social services may also be influ-
enced by other factors, such as federal statutes (e.g., requiring investigation
and placement on a registry for nursing assistants and the ombudsman
program, which responds to complaints of abuse in nursing homes) or
Medicaid rules on abuse (which must be followed in order to receive reim-
bursement for services). Several states, including Ohio and Wisconsin, have
recently evaluated their entire systems of response to elder mistreatment.
Wisconsin’s review concluded that the role of the adult protective services
system should be focused exclusively on providing social services and that
investigations should be conducted solely by law enforcement agencies
(Wisconsin Department of Health and Family Services, 2001).
     In the context of investigations, a method being increasingly used,
modeled on the child protective system, is the state abuse registry. As
mentioned above, a federal law requires a registry to be kept for certified
nursing assistants who have been substantiated for abuse. Long-term care
providers are required to check this registry before hiring an employee.
These registries are most often maintained by the state nursing board, but a
number of states have developed similar registries for any caregiver sub-
stantiated for abuse. Maintaining a registry can be an expensive activity,
especially if substantial procedural protections are accorded to people whose
names are listed. Florida and Minnesota have well-developed systems but,
as is true with other interventions, the effects of maintaining a registry have
not been studied. The unanswered questions include whether people are
safer and, ultimately, whether these interventions are cost-effective.
     The third, and often most time-consuming, function of adult protective
services is to develop a protective services plan aiming to terminate mis-
treatment and ensure safety. Assessments of the individual’s need for help
with activities of daily living and of his or her support network are con-
ducted as part of the overall plan. Additional services can include attendant
care, food, housing, rent or mortgage payments, transportation, money
management, changing of locks, cleaning, respite care, and ongoing coun-
seling and case management. Adult protective services programs have also
tried to adapt the domestic violence model of offender treatment described
by Wolfe (this volume) to perpetrators of elder mistreatment. San Fran-
cisco and Los Angeles have experimented with small groups targeting per-
petrators and using cognitive behavioral techniques to affect the violent
behavior.
     Although reporting is mandatory in most states, a critical principle
embodied in most state statutes is client autonomy. Simply put, services
cannot be provided to clients without their consent. The policy of least
126                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

restrictive intervention is generally embraced, along with the goal of maxi-
mizing client independence. These principles are laid out in the National
Association of Adult Protective Services Administrators statement on ethics
(2002). Although the vast majority of services are based on consent of the
client, about 10 percent of interventions are provided without client con-
sent. Involuntary intervention is legally authorized in most states if the
refusing client is exposed to a substantial risk of harm or if the client lacks
the capacity to make an informed decision to accept or reject protective
services. Available interventions typically include guardianship and conser-
vatorship. In addition, emergency protective placements, which are usually
limited to 24–72 hours and provided only with judicial approval, may be
available. Courts may also issue restraining orders to caregivers and mem-
bers of the elder’s family.
     For difficult cases, adult protective services agencies often convene or
participate in multidisciplinary review teams. These teams represent the
best effort to offer a coordinated community response to elder mistreat-
ment.
     Many would agree that adult protective services is an underfunded and
overworked system, often operating in a crisis management mode (as did
children’s protective services in its earlier years). However scarce the re-
sources, choices are inevitably being made about their allocation. It does
not appear that any of the adult protective services activities, including
triage, investigation, and service planning and delivery, have ever been
evaluated. When surveyed by Rosalie Wolf in 1999, state administrators
wanted research to define outcomes and measure them, to identify the best
practices for intervention, and to help design effective training for their
workers (Wolf, 1999). Research is critically needed on the effectiveness of
the interventions that are now being deployed. How well, and at what cost,
do interventions improve the safety, security, and independence of older
persons who have come to adult protective services attention for mistreat-
ment?
     Research is needed on the effectiveness of adult protective services
interventions, ideally in study designs that compare outcomes in cases in
which services were provided with those in which eligible recipients de-
clined offered services or other cases in which mistreatment of an equiva-
lent nature has been identified.
     It should be noted that a large proportion—in some states, more than
half—of the reports coming into adult protective services concern elderly
persons who are neglecting their own care. A typical scenario includes an
elderly person with dementia who is losing the ability to cook or take care
of a serious medical condition and who has no natural support to call on
for assistance. The panel has decided to exclude cases of self-neglect from
this report in order to concentrate its attention on the need to develop
EVALUATING INTERVENTIONS                                                   127

knowledge about elder mistreatment. However, the inclusion of self-ne-
glect within the jurisdiction of adult protective services can easily confound
research on elder mistreatment. Thus it is essential for researchers studying
adult protective services interventions (or studying other interventions de-
rived from adult protective services activity or using subjects identified in
adult protective services databases) to exclude cases of self-neglect or segre-
gate them from cases involving harm or neglect by others.


                  HEALTH SYSTEM INTERVENTIONS
     Wolfe (this volume) describes the progress made in child abuse detec-
tion when health care professionals began to routinely screen for child
abuse indicators and to report worrisome cases. Family physicians and the
emergency room physicians are ideally situated to see mistreated elders and
to refer suspected abuse and neglect for appropriate action. The task of
designing and implementing an elder mistreatment screening program for
health care professionals presents special challenges. It will require educat-
ing health care professionals about the normal changes of aging and how
these changes may influence the appearance of forensic markers of elder
mistreatment, such as bruises, fractures, and pressure sores (see Dyer et al.,
this volume.) They must be able to distinguish between cases in which an
injury is accidental or unpreventable and those in which it is inflicted or
otherwise preventable.
     Research on the effects of training health care professionals in respond-
ing to family violence indicates that the best practices are based on adult
learning theory—that is those in which the curriculum is attached to screen-
ing instruments and the ability to practice the skills. The same is likely to be
true for neglect cases. Several initiatives are under way to provide special-
ized training to health care professionals. For example, the geriatric pro-
gram at Baylor University is developing a curriculum on elder mistreatment
for medical school use and is involving medical residents in their elder
mistreatment assessments. The California Medical Training Center has
also developed a program to train health care providers to identify, evalu-
ate, and document injuries in collaboration with law enforcement and so-
cial services.
     The increase in home health nursing services has put a number of
nurses on the front lines, well situated to see potential abuse or neglect
victims. Nursing training typically includes information on family violence
but is also limited on its information about elder mistreatment. A promis-
ing nursing specialization, developed along with the field of family violence,
is forensic nursing. Similar to the development of a national cadre of sexual
assault examiners, these and other nurses are expanding their focus to
include evaluation of suspicious and serious unexplained injury. These
128                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

experts are beginning to be used by adult protective services, law enforce-
ment agencies, and the rest of the criminal justice system on a small scale,
particularly for those elderly persons who are not cognitively able to pro-
vide testimony about their abuse- and neglect-related injuries. A few nurs-
ing schools offer this type of specialized advance practice training. The first
masters level program with this specialty has been established at Johns
Hopkins University. Research on the effectiveness of forensic nurses in
identifying elder mistreatment (in all settings, including the clinic and the
courtroom) would be useful.
     Another part of the health care system that often provides the first
response to elder mistreatment is the emergency medical technician. While
some training has been done locally by adult protective services, recently
the national organization of emergency medical technicians, in conjunction
with the National Center on Elder Abuse, has completed a curriculum for
their members on elder mistreatment. Research on emergency medical
technicians who are trained and that call in social services (adult protective
services) would provide valuable information on this promising new inter-
vention.
     The hospital setting may also offer an opportunity to detect mistreat-
ment and to intervene so as to prevent further occurrences. Hospitals and
the health care professionals working in hospitals have an obligation to
ensure the safest possible discharge for their patients. As methods of detect-
ing mistreatment improve, perhaps through the detection of sentinel events
associated with mistreatment, it will be possible to target interventions at
hospitalized patients who have been mistreated prior to admission. The
panel encourages research on hospital-based interventions to prevent fur-
ther mistreatment of hospital inpatients after discharge. This research
should include hospital emergency departments, where many mistreated
elders may be seen but not ultimately admitted to the hospital prior to
discharge. Interventions to detect and manage mistreatment in hospital
emergency departments should therefore also be evaluated.
     Other interventions occur at the organization level. The rules of gov-
erning organizations like the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health
Care Organizations as well as rules connecting continued Medicaid funding
to long-term care and community residential facilities include requirements
for recognizing and responding to cases of elder mistreatment. The primary
requirements include having a policy to assess possible victims and adher-
ing to state legal requirements relating to investigation as well as prevention
of further mistreatment. Accreditation policies and practices relating to
elder mistreatment should be studied on a systematic and ongoing basis.
EVALUATING INTERVENTIONS                                                 129

                CRIMINAL JUSTICE INTERVENTIONS
     Law enforcement officers respond to and investigate allegations of
abuse when they are brought to their attention by some other organization,
such as adult protective services, or some other individual. In addition, law
enforcement officers are often “first responders” and are the first agency
representatives to be called to an environment in which mistreatment is
occurring, either to investigate an allegation that a law has been violated or
to make a “welfare check.” Officers may be the first to realize that an older
person is experiencing mistreatment. Officers who recognize the signs of
mistreatment and know what community agencies are available to provide
assistance can help the victim by bringing in adult protective services, pro-
viding referrals to community services, or in other ways. Linking to other
agencies is particularly critical when law enforcement officers arrest a
caregiver for elder mistreatment and remove him or her from the home;
otherwise the victim may be left without needed care.
     As discussed by Dyer et al. (this volume), medical examiners and coro-
ners may be called on to determine whether death resulted from or was
related to elder mistreatment. Because of their expertise in assessing un-
natural injury and death, they may be asked to make similar determinations
about suspected victims who are still alive. They may also be the first to
discover that abuse has occurred, during an autopsy conducted for some
reason other than suspected mistreatment. Medical examiners and coro-
ners can play an important role in fatality review teams that analyze deaths
resulting from elder abuse.
     A key issue is whether and under what circumstances criminal charges
should be filed against alleged perpetrators of mistreatment. Reports from
law enforcement, adult protective services, and other practitioners indicate
that the number of charges filed in such cases has been increasing. The
prosecutorial decisions require complex judgments balancing deterrent and
punitive considerations (which focus on the seriousness of the offenders’
conduct, including harm and culpability) with protective considerations
(which focus on what measures will best ensure the future safety and well-
being of the elderly victim).
     Prosecutorial response to elder mistreatment is an understudied area
that should receive heightened attention by the National Institute of Justice
and other funders of criminal justice research.
     Victim/witness professionals (sometimes referred to as victim advo-
cates or similar titles) also have a dual role in elder mistreatment interven-
tion. Victim/witness professionals may work in law enforcement agencies,
prosecutors’ offices, or community services organizations. The timing of
their involvement and their role depends to some extent on the entity for
which they work. In general, they assist crime victims by providing sup-
130                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

port and explaining the criminal justice system, accompanying them to
court, arranging transportation for proceedings, coordinating respite care
if the victim is a caregiver, and helping the victim file for victim compensa-
tion funds. It is possible that victim/witness professionals will be the first
to recognize that victims are experiencing elder mistreatment. Accord-
ingly, victim/witness professionals need to understand the risk factors for
and indicators of mistreatment and to know what services are available for
these victims. Elder mistreatment researchers should be aware of the
existence of these victim/witness assistance programs, not only as possible
targets of research in themselves, but as sources of information in other
studies.


      PROFESSIONAL SPECIALIZATION AND COLLABORATION
     Many professions, advocacy groups, and other organizations are in-
volved in efforts to prevent and respond to elder mistreatment. Although
adult protective services is the backbone of the system, community-based
interventions draw on the health professions, law enforcement personnel
and all participants in the criminal justice system, the bar and other partici-
pants in the civil justice system, financial institutions, and many others.
Increasingly specialized responses are being developed through targeted
training and interdisciplinary collaboration. For example, efforts are under
way in many communities to improve the response to elder mistreatment
victims by educating criminal justice system participants about the prob-
lem, developing specialized investigation and prosecution units, enhancing
collaboration, and reforming statutes and policies. Most of these initiatives
are of recent origin and have not yet been studied in a systematic way.


                         Professional Specialization
     Professional specialization is a critical feature of an effective social
response to any emerging social problem, once the problem has been recog-
nized. In its evolution as a social problem, elder mistreatment is now in this
“recognition and specialization” stage. Specialized training of health care
professionals, mentioned earlier, continues to be an important challenge
(Institute of Medicine, 2001). In addition, the increasing numbers of attor-
neys specializing in elder law, whether working in private practice or pub-
licly funded legal services programs, can be valuable resources in collabora-
tive efforts to prevent and respond to all forms of elder mistreatment.
Prevention is enhanced through adequate counseling about the potential for
abuse of common legal planning tools, such as powers of attorney (particu-
larly durable powers of attorney), joint bank accounts, joint property own-
ership, trusts, and wills (see Hafemeister, this volume). Collaborative ef-
EVALUATING INTERVENTIONS                                                  131

forts between the specialized bar, health care providers (in counseling and
vulnerability assessments), adult protective services and law enforcement,
when mistreatment is suspected, could produce new ideas about preven-
tion.
     Depending on the laws of particular jurisdictions, several legal tools
can be used to respond to elder mistreatment when it occurs. To stop
physical or sexual abuse, a lawyer might need to obtain a civil order of
protection to keep the perpetrator away from the victim or pursue an
eviction action against an abusive tenant or adult child living with the
victim. To combat financial exploitation, a lawyer might need to void a
document or transaction because the victim signed it under duress or due to
fraud or undue influence. The lawyer might need to help the victim revoke
a power of attorney that is being misused or draft a power of attorney or
trust in order to wrest control from a perpetrator. It might be necessary to
seek to have a guardian or conservator appointed for an abuse victim in
order to reduce or terminate the authority of the abuser. It might also be
necessary to defend against the appointment of a guardian or conservator
or pursue the appointment of an alternative guardian or conservator when
the person seeking appointment is mistreating the older person. Civil law-
yers also can pursue actions for damages in order to recover money that has
been exploited or to make the victim whole for injuries by the perpetrator,
and they can pursue actions against companies employing abusive caregivers
for negligent hiring and inadequate supervision.
     Research about the use of civil justice interventions and their effective-
ness in preventing exploitation and other harm to elders should be jointly
sponsored by the National Institute of Justice and the Administration on
Aging.


                      Multidisciplinary Collaboration
     One of the few federal responses to elder mistreatment has come from
the “aging network.” This term refers to a wide array of organizations and
services established and funded through the Older Americans Act in part to
address elder mistreatment. Title VII of the act supports elder rights pro-
grams, including the long-term care ombudsman, legal services, outreach,
and elder abuse prevention efforts. The Title VII elder abuse prevention
monies fund state units on aging to conduct prevention activities at the state
level or to fund area agencies on aging to implement prevention activities at
the local level.
     Community collaborations have played an increasingly important role
in recent years by suggesting interventions when serious elder mistreatment
occurs. Some jurisdiction have created multidisciplinary teams (sometimes
known as MDTs or M-Teams) composed of professionals and practitioners
132                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

from health, law enforcement, social services, or others as appropriate, to
serve one or both of the following purposes: (1) analysis and collaboration
on difficult cases that cannot be resolved through the intervention of a
single professional or practitioner and (2) recommendations for and devel-
opment of systemic improvements in response to problems unearthed
through case analysis and experience. Fiduciary abuse specialist teams
(sometimes known as financial abuse specialist teams or FASTs) are a
distinct type of multidisciplinary team that focuses on fiduciary abuse. As
such, they may involve different participants, such as accountants, from a
more general team. Fatality review teams (FRTs, also known as death
review teams or death investigation review teams) are another specialized
form of multidisciplinary team. Their goal is to bring together various
disciplines to examine deaths that resulted, or may have resulted, from
elder abuse and to determine whether systemic changes in the response to
elder abuse victims could prevent similar deaths in the future. Members of
fatality review teams may also determine that the circumstances of a death
ought to be pursued by a prosecutor; they have been used in the child abuse
and domestic violence fields for years, and the elder abuse field is just
beginning to establish them.
     The Administration on Aging and, more recently, the Department of
Justice have funded grant projects and conferences and stimulated efforts to
identify and share information about best practices in elder mistreatment
interventions. For more than 20 years, the Administration on Aging has
funded the National Center on Elder Abuse (NCEA) to develop and dis-
seminate information on elder mistreatment, including adult protective ser-
vices. The Department of Justice has sponsored some focus groups, a
roundtable on forensic issues, a national symposium on elder mistreatment
and consumer fraud, and several conferences encouraging law enforcement
involvement in mistreatment cases, development of training programs for
banking personnel, curricula to educate various professionals about the
need for and benefit of collaboration, support of fatality review teams, and
the development of recommendations related to forensic issues. The Na-
tional Center on Elder Abuse recently conducted a national summit, bring-
ing together experts from several professions to develop recommendations
for a national agenda on elder mistreatment. Recommendations include a
nationwide public awareness campaign, coordination of law enforcement
efforts, study of adult protective services, and a federal law on elder mis-
treatment, among others. All of these efforts are now being pursued in the
absence of any evidence regarding the effectiveness of the interventions
being proposed and endorsed.
     The specialized focus and collaboration reflected in these initiatives is
an important step forward, because it increases the likelihood that systemic
problems will be identified and that targeted interventions will be imple-
EVALUATING INTERVENTIONS                                                       133

mented. Specialization and interdisciplinary linkages also are more likely
to lead to collaboration between practitioners and researchers and there-
fore to better design and evaluation of new interventions.
     The panel strongly encourages government agencies and private spon-
sors of elder mistreatment programs to give priority to interventions that
emphasize specialized professional training and interdisciplinary collabora-
tion. Moreover, in the panel’s view, all new initiatives should include
sufficient funding for evaluation.


        INTERVENTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES
     Throughout this report, the panel has focused attention on general
issues concerning the definition, identification, and prevention of mistreat-
ment, regardless of setting. Although residential care facilities were not
excluded from the panel’s view, family living settings have usually been
emphasized. This section briefly addresses several specific research priori-
ties pertaining to residential care settings. Current knowledge about mis-
treatment in nursing homes and other residential care settings is summa-
rized by Hawes (this volume), and a recent report, Improving the Quality
of Long-Term Care, by the Institute of Medicine (2001) provides a compre-
hensive review of the broader subject of quality improvement, of which
patient safety (including avoidance of mistreatment and harm) is a core
component.
     Among the most important priorities identified in Improving the Qual-
ity of Long-Term Care concerns the need for uniform definitions and data
elements for characterizing the components, processes, and outcomes of
long-term care across different jurisdictions, populations, and settings of
care (e.g., nursing homes, assisted living facilities, and home health care).
The report envisions national systematic and comprehensive data bearing
on the staffing and care provided in the various settings of long-term care.
This panel endorses the Institute of Medicine committee’s recommenda-
tion, while emphasizing that uniform data elements relating to mistreat-
ment (including subjective measures of security) should be included in the
outcome measures, and that implementation of this recommendation would
facilitate research on the effectiveness of interventions of any kind (whether
initiated voluntarily or through regulatory action). Virtually nothing is
now known, for example, about the nature and effectiveness of regulatory
efforts relating to assisted living facilities and other residential care facilities
other than nursing homes (Harrington et al., 2000).
     Hawes (this volume) discusses the prevalence and demography of mis-
treatment among residents of long-term care facilities, as well as discusses
the array of government and quasi-government agencies responsible for
receiving and investigating complaints of elder mistreatment in nursing
134                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

homes and other residential care facilities. These agencies include the long-
term care ombudsman program, the state agency responsible for licensing
nursing homes, the state agency responsible for the operation of the nurse
aide registry, Medicaid fraud control units, and professional licensing
boards. Adult protective services programs, health care professionals, and
participants in the criminal justice and civil justice systems also may be
involved in responding to mistreated residents of nursing homes and other
long-term care facilities in much the same way that they respond to victims
who live in their own homes.
    The literature on compliance with, and enforcement of, federal regula-
tions governing nursing homes has been reviewed by the Institute of Medi-
cine (2001) and by Hawes (this volume), and the U.S. General Accounting
Office maintains active oversight of regulatory enforcement, calling atten-
tion to gaps and weaknesses. For example, a recent report (U.S. General
Accounting Office, 2002) called attention to the inconsistent definitions of
“abuse” used in various states, the “hidden” nature of many incidents of
abuse due to underrecognition and underreporting, and the gaps in em-
ployee screening.
    Despite the widespread perception that institutional residents are at
great risk of elder mistreatment, specific interventions to prevent elder
mistreatment in long-term care residential settings have been limited. How-
ever, current practices in nursing homes and assisted living facilities, as well
as more general research on determinants of quality of care in nursing
homes, suggest several avenues for intervention.
    Possible interventions to prevent institutional elder mistreatment fall
into three general categories: (1) Hiring and supervision of staff: these are
steps that the facility can take, either in terms of practice or policies, to
reduce the likelihood of elder mistreatment. (2) Staff training and skill
development: staff can be trained in concrete techniques to help make them
aware of what elder mistreatment is and when and how to prevent it. (3)
Response to and treatment of elder mistreatment: victims of elder mistreat-
ment in residential settings may require specialized treatment programs.
    Because actual interventions are rare, potentially promising interven-
tions in this area that require testing and evaluation are briefly reviewed.


                       Hiring and Supervision of Staff
     The following are examples of managerial initiatives that may reduce
the likelihood of elder mistreatment:

    Address hiring practices: the area that has received most attention in
nursing home research is staffing. One of the endemic problems over the
past decade has been a shortage of qualified staff. According to the Insti-
EVALUATING INTERVENTIONS                                                      135

tute of Medicine (2001), “research evidence suggests that both nursing-to-
resident staffing levels and the ratio of professional nurses to other nursing
personnel are important predictors of high quality in nursing homes.” The
committee accordingly urged the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Ser-
vices (CMS) to “give high priority” to research on staffing in nursing homes
and the impact of various staffing configurations on outcomes. This panel
agrees.
     The shortage of workers has led in some cases to lax hiring policies and
to a lack of serious screening of employees. Some facilities hire a high
proportion of individuals at the certified nursing assistant level who have
criminal backgrounds or active substance abuse problems. Interventions
that improve facilities’ ability to screen employees and determine individu-
als who are suited for caregiving work would be very useful. State abuse
registries may fill some of that need, but research on the problems with
state registries and the potential benefits of a federal registry in lieu of, or in
addition to, the state registries would be helpful. Tools to assess risk of
abusive behavior prior to hiring should be developed.
     Improve supervision: a persistent problem in long-term care facilities is
inconsistent (or absent) supervision. It is clear that supervisory staff must
give a consistent message that caring and responsible staff will be rewarded
and that elder mistreatment will not be tolerated. Furthermore, a key
component of elder mistreatment prevention is the maintenance of a high
index of suspicion on the part of supervisors. In reported cases of nursing
home mistreatment, supervisors and administrators sometimes ignore signs
and symptoms of elder mistreatment because of a false belief that “it can’t
happen here.” Training and awareness interventions with supervisors in
nursing homes, with a focus on detection of elder mistreatment, are likely
to be fruitful.
     Address burnout: one of the strongest research findings is the positive
relationship between staff burnout and abusive behavior (Pillemer and
Bachman-Prehn, 1991). There is no question that nursing home staff work
under stressful conditions. Job stress and burnout can be addressed both at
the structural and at the individual levels. A major cause of burnout is
chronic short-staffing that is endemic to long-term care facilities (see Hawes,
this volume). Although a discussion of solutions to staffing problems in
nursing homes is beyond the scope of this report, there is no question that
improving the numbers of staff and decreasing turnover rates would con-
tribute to elder mistreatment prevention. The effects of different staffing
models and staffing patterns could be evaluated to determine the effect on
prevalence and severity of elder mistreatment (see Hawes, this volume). On
the individual level, stress reduction and management programs should be
evaluated to determine whether they have potential for preventing elder
mistreatment
136                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

                   Staff Training and Skill Development
     Several factors have been identified as related to elder mistreatment by
staff, which can be addressed through training programs. First, a striking
finding from several studies (Pillemer and Moore, 1989; Pillemer and
Bachman-Prehn, 1991; Hawes, this volume) is the high degree of interper-
sonal conflict experienced in nursing home work. For example, the major-
ity of staff reported that they had conflicts at least several times a week over
residents’ unwillingness to eat, personal hygiene, unwillingness to dress,
toileting, and other issues. Many staff reported such conflicts every day
(Pillemer and Moore, 1989).
     A second area involves problematic behavioral symptoms exhibited by
residents, including wandering, yelling, suspiciousness, inability to cooper-
ate with care, and particularly anger and verbal and physical aggression. In
nursing homes, one of the most important reasons that mistreatment of
residents occurs is a lack of training and ability on the part of staff to deal
with aggressive behavior by residents (Hawes et al., 2001).
     Both of these areas point to critical training needs for staff. As a
method of elder mistreatment prevention, workers in long-term care set-
tings can be shown effective ways of modifying residents’ behavior that can
defuse these difficult situations before aggressive outcomes occur. Noelker
and Bass (1995) pointed out that caregivers also need training by staff to
make case management more effective. It cannot be assumed that staff will
learn how to manage the interpersonal aspects of resident care on the job,
as is typically the case. The provision of a tool kit of techniques and
methods of handling these problems has elder mistreatment prevention
potential.
     The best-known training program that addresses these issues was de-
veloped by the Coalition of Advocates for the Rights and Interests of the
Elderly (CARIE), entitled Competence With Compassion: An Abuse Pre-
vention Training Program for Long Term Care Staff. This elder mistreat-
ment prevention curriculum is designed for nursing assistants in long-term
care facilities. The program has three major objectives: to increase staff
awareness of actual elder mistreatment and potentially abusive situations;
to equip nursing assistants with appropriate conflict intervention strategies;
and thereby to reduce staff-resident conflict and abusive behaviors by staff.
Although a randomized, controlled evaluation of this program has not been
conducted, project data are promising. Individuals undergoing the training
showed improved attitudes toward residents between pretest and posttest.
Staff also reported less conflict with residents after the training, as well as
reductions in resident aggression toward themselves. This is an indication
of the success of the training, since the curriculum addressed how to avoid
or defuse conflicts with residents before the resident becomes aggressive.
EVALUATING INTERVENTIONS                                                   137

Most important, self-reported abusive actions by staff declined as a result
of the training.


            Response to and Treatment of Elder Mistreatment
     There is little research or practical guidance regarding effective re-
sponse to incidents of elder mistreatment in residential settings or to meth-
ods of treating victims to ameliorate the negative outcomes of elder mis-
treatment. As Hawes suggests (this volume), studies of the effectiveness of
ombudsman programs (which are primarily responsible for coordinating
investigation and response to elder mistreatment cases) would be very use-
ful. Do such programs have an impact on the incidence of elder mistreat-
ment, and do they lead to better outcomes for victims?
     It is also possible that the range of victim assistance services offered to
family violence victims could be applicable to nursing homes. In some cases
of sexual assault, rape crisis services have been provided to nursing home
residents (Burgess et al., 2000). Thus far, no formal intervention programs
have been created to counsel or provide specialized therapy to elder mis-
treatment victims in residential settings. Such programs should be devel-
oped and evaluated.


        Unannounced Long-Term Care Facility Inspection Teams
     At least two states, Florida and California, have developed long-term
care facility inspection teams (known as Operation Spot Check and Opera-
tion Guardian, respectively) that conduct random, unannounced visits of
nursing homes and assisted living facilities. The teams are generally com-
posed of representatives from the attorney general’s office, law enforce-
ment, the long-term care ombudsman program, and other government en-
forcement agencies, including code enforcement officers and local or state
fire marshals. The unannounced visits supplement the existing annual
inspections conducted by state government pursuant to federal law.
     It would be valuable to study whether unannounced long-term care
facility inspection teams make any difference in the amount or types of
abuse and neglect experienced by residents of these facilities. Another
researchable question is the impact on staff and management of these unan-
nounced inspections.


             URGENT NEED FOR OUTCOME RESEARCH
   The need for careful scientific research on the effects of interventions is
underscored by the sobering findings of the only published elder mistreat-
ment intervention study using an experimental design. This study, funded
138                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

by the National Institute of Justice, indicates that households receiving the
intervention had an increased risk of subsequent mistreatment (Davis and
Medina-Ariza, 2001). The investigators adapted a model they had previ-
ously used in a study of the effects of a coordinated team response to family
violence (Davis and Taylor, 1997). In the subsequent elder mistreatment
study, the target population was persons living in selected public housing
units in New York City who reported elder abuse (defined as physical abuse
and psychological abuse) incidents to the police. Random assignment for
the intervention occurred at two levels. First, 30 of 60 public housing
projects were randomly assigned to receive public education about elder
abuse (e.g., posters, leaflets, and project staff presentations). Second, in all
60 housing projects, half of the households reporting elder abuse incidents
to the police were randomly assigned to receive home visits by a team of a
police officer and a domestic violence counselor. The team discussed legal
options and police procedures and attempted to link the households to
social services. Victims were also encouraged to call the police if repeat
incidents occurred. To determine whether abuse continued, police records
were checked and victims were interviewed 6 and 12 months after the
triggering incident.
     Six months after the intervention, households receiving the home visit
called the police significantly more often than controls, both in housing
projects that received public education and those that did not. This is not
surprising, since the home visit was designed to invite such reports. But this
expectation was based on the assumption that the intervention would
change reporting behavior, not that it would increase incidents of abuse. (If
anything, one might have expected the number of actual incidents of abuse
to be reduced due to deterrence.) The surprising finding was that that the
increased number of calls was accompanied by an increased number of
incidents of abuse, as reported by the victims to the research interviewers.
That is, when households received both home visits and public education,
victims of elder abuse reported significantly higher levels of physical abuse
than households that received neither intervention or only one of them.
During the period between 6 and 12 months after the intervention, the
differences in calls to the police disappeared, but households that received
the dual intervention continued to report significantly more incidents of
physical abuse to the interviewers.
     The researchers have speculated about the possible explanations for
this paradoxical finding, including the possibility that the intervention an-
gered the perpetrators. (As they pointed out, however, the perpetrators
were not interviewed.) The most pertinent observation from the panel’s
perspective is that the study raises more questions than it answers. Even
well-intentioned interventions may have unexpected, and even harmful,
outcomes.
EVALUATING INTERVENTIONS                                                  139

    Research on the effects of elder mistreatment interventions is urgently
needed. Existing interventions to prevent or ameliorate elder mistreatment
should be evaluated, and agencies funding new intervention programs
should require and fund a scientifically adequate evaluation as a compo-
nent of each grant. Specifically:

     • Research is needed on reporting practices and on the effects of
reporting, taking maximum advantage of the opportunity for comparisons
of practices and outcomes in states with and without mandated reporting.
     • Research is needed on the effectiveness of adult protective services
interventions, ideally in study designs that compare outcomes in cases in
which services were provided with those in which eligible recipients de-
clined offered services or other cases in which mistreatment of an equiva-
lent nature has been identified.
     • Intervention or prevention research based in existing health care
environments that come into contact with mistreated elders, such as hospi-
tals, emergency departments, and emergency response services, should be a
priority as it takes advantage of the existing expertise and resources of these
services.
     • The development of adult protective services/university research
teams should be encouraged in order to evaluate existing data, recommend
improvements in the collection of data, analyze incident reports, and design
the studies of outcomes urged in this report.
                                      8


                        Research Ethics




                       I  t became evident early in the panel’s deliberations
that investigators are uncertain about the ethical requirements governing
research on elder mistreatment. They are particularly concerned about two
issues: (1) Under what circumstances is it ethically necessary to exclude
elderly persons from participation in research on the ground that they are
incapable of giving informed consent? (2) How should investigators re-
spond to evidence of mistreatment elicited during the study, and what
should participants be told about this problem in advance?
     It also became apparent to the panel that Institutional Review Boards
(IRBs) have embraced varying approaches to these problems, and that un-
duly restrictive IRB positions could impede important advances in the un-
derstanding of elder mistreatment. In reviewing proposed research proto-
cols in the current regulatory context, IRBs exercise a great deal of discretion
within the general parameters set by the federal research regulations (i.e.,
the so-called Common Rule) (U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices, 2001a) that govern all federally funded research, and the regulations
of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (1999) that govern clinical trials
of drugs and devices. To help provide better guidance to investigators and
IRBs in preparing and reviewing elder mistreatment research protocols, the
panel commissioned a paper by Rebecca Dresser, a leading authority on
research ethics. Her paper (this volume) surveys the issues that tend to
recur in research on elder mistreatment and offers many helpful suggestions
about how to respond to them.


                                     140
RESEARCH ETHICS                                                         141

                        DECISIONAL CAPACITY
     As Dresser (this volume) indicates, many of the concerns in elder mis-
treatment research relate to the assessment of decision-making capacity and
the proper responses to situations in which potential participants’ decision-
making capacity is impaired. Taking into account that elderly persons who
are most vulnerable to mistreatment are likely to be decisionally impaired,
and that decisional impairment is often embedded in the statutory defini-
tion of mistreatment, the opportunity to elicit information from cognitively
impaired individuals is essential in almost every study of elder mistreat-
ment. The problem is by no means limited to elder mistreatment research;
similar observations could be made about many other types of research
focusing on older subjects or on people with mental retardation or schizo-
phrenia. Not surprisingly, ethical issues relating to consent by cognitively
impaired subjects and surrogate decision making have come to center stage
in recent years and have been addressed in a rapidly developing literature
(Berg, 1996; Bonnie, 1997; Dresser, 1999; National Bioethics Advisory
Commission, 1998). Although the Dresser paper provides a thorough
review of these issues, several points are emphasized here.
     First, aging research suggests that most older adults are cognitively
intact and should be regarded as presumptively able to make informed,
voluntary decisions about research participation; merely being older than
age 65 or 75 does not warrant special screening procedures or other protec-
tions. Heightened safeguards should be considered when the research in-
volves greater than minimal risk and the study population is especially
likely to include persons with decisional impairments or persons who are
especially vulnerable to pressure or influence.
     Second, a diagnosis of dementia is not congruent with decisional inca-
pacity (Marson et al., 1995). Instead, an assessment of decisional capacity
requires a highly contextualized judgment concerning a particular person’s
ability to perform ethically relevant decision-making tasks in relation to a
particular study. Significant advances have recently been made in concep-
tualizing, operationalizing, and measuring these decision-making abilities.
For example, according to one widely used approach, the ethically relevant
abilities in making informed decisions about treatment or research partici-
pation are understanding of risks and benefits and other ethically relevant
information, appreciation of the relevance of that information in one’s own
situation, reasoning or processing the information logically, and ability to
make a stable choice among alternatives (Appelbaum and Grisso, 1988;
Grisso and Appelbaum, 1998). Instruments are being developed to help
researchers assess and document participants’ decision-making abilities,
both at the initiation of the study and, if needed, on a continuing basis
during the study (Kim et al., 2001; Marson et al., 1995).
142                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

      Third, it is understood that the decision-making abilities of many older
people with dementia or other mental disorders will be impaired to some
extent. However, mere impairment does not amount to incapacity.
Whether a person’s impairment (in understanding, appreciation, or reason-
ing) is substantial enough to preclude informed consent for a particular
study depends on the complexity of the decision-making task for that study,
and on its risk-benefit profile (Grisso and Appelbaum, 1998; American
Psychiatric Association, 1998; National Bioethics Advisory Commission,
1998). A minimum threshold of capacity must be satisfied for all studies in
which the participant is exposed to any risk, but the level of capacity
needed above this floor will depend on the characteristics of the particular
study. Moreover, impairments that would preclude valid consent in studies
with significant risk are ethically immaterial in studies involving less than
minimal risk (National Bioethics Advisory Commission, 2001). Similarly,
additional safeguards that may be needed to ensure proper consent in stud-
ies involving significant risk are not necessary in studies involving lower
risk. Risk stratification of this kind is a prominent and essential feature of
sensible ethical review.
      Fourth, even if an elderly person lacks the capacity to give informed
consent for the particular study, his or her participation may be authorized
by a surrogate decision maker as long as the subject is adequately protected
from harm and the IRB finds that all the other criteria specified in the
Common Rule have been met. The Common Rule, however, provides very
little guidance to IRBs, within these parameters, about the conditions under
which surrogates should be permitted to authorize participation for
decisionally incapable subjects in lieu of excluding them from participation
altogether (Bonnie, 1997; Dresser, 2001; National Bioethics Advisory Com-
mission, 1998). This lack of guidance has led to inconsistency among IRBs
and frustration among investigators. However, recent reports by expert
bodies have begun to provide such guidance and to assemble best practices
(National Bioethics Advisory Commission, 1998; American Psychiatric As-
sociation, 1998). The important point for our purposes is that the Com-
mon Rule provides ample flexibility to IRBs to allow important research on
elder mistreatment to go forward on the basis of surrogate consent, particu-
larly if it involves less than minimal risk.
      Finally, another concern is the availability of a suitable surrogate. The
Common Rule refers generally to individuals “authorized under applicable
law to consent on behalf of a prospective subject’s participation.” As
Dresser (this volume) notes, however, many states lack clear rules in this
area. To the extent that impediments to research arise from ambiguities or
constraints in state law governing surrogate decision making, these are
generic problems in research that, in the end, depend on clarification of
state law. The panel urges states to extend their rules governing surrogate
RESEARCH ETHICS                                                          143

decision making for health care decisions to the context of research (see
Hoffman and Schwartz, 1998).
     It is possible that the most suitable surrogate would be a family mem-
ber whose own improper conduct would be exposed by the study. Under
these circumstances, involving possible conflicts of interest between the
decision maker and the potential research subject, other suitable surrogates
should be identified. As Dresser (this volume) notes, analogous problems in
child mistreatment research have been addressed in the subpart of the
Common Rule prescribing additional protections for children participating
in research (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2001a). Over-
all, it should be emphasized that, in the absence of impediments rooted in
state law, the IRBs have a great deal of flexibility in permitting research to
go forward with decisionally incapable participants as long as a suitable
surrogate authorizes participation and the participants are protected from
harm.


     PROPER RESPONSES TO EVIDENCE OF MISTREATMENT
     Another major area of ethical uncertainty with particular salience in
elder mistreatment research concerns ethically permissible responses to evi-
dence of mistreatment that may be elicited during the study (and the asso-
ciated issue of what potential subjects should be told about this possibility
during the consent process). Deciding how the investigator should respond
to evidence of mistreatment implicates the investigator’s most fundamental
ethical duties in human research—the duty to protect participants from
harm and the duty to respect their autonomy as persons—and also exposes
possible conflicts between the interests of victims of mistreatment (in being
protected) and suspected perpetrators of mistreatment (in avoiding possible
punitive interventions). Because both the possible perpetrator of mistreat-
ment and the possible victim could be regarded as subjects of (or partici-
pants in) the research, the investigator may owe both of them a duty to
avoid harm.
     If these puzzles were not enough to create ethical complexity, the pos-
sibility that state laws may require researchers to disclose evidence of mis-
treatment to official agencies highlights a possible incongruity between
state reporting policies (requiring breaches of confidentiality) and federal
research policy (emphasizing the need to protect confidentiality). It can
readily be seen why IRBs would be perplexed by these problems (which also
arise in research that could elicit evidence of child mistreatment) and why
some IRBs might end up embracing policies that effectively preclude other-
wise meritorious studies.
     Because the goals and methods of elder mistreatment research vary so
widely, it is neither possible nor desirable to formulate generally applicable
144                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

policies or rules about how to resolve these problems. The most sensible
approach is to avoid hard-and-fast rules altogether and to permit investiga-
tors and IRBs to tailor their responses to the settings and protocols of the
particular studies. With this caveat in mind, the panel recommends that the
National Institute on Aging, in collaboration with the Office for Human
Research Protections and other sponsors of elder mistreatment research,
undertake a consensus project to develop ethical guidelines for responding
to evidence of elder mistreatment in various types of research settings (e.g.,
telephone surveys, in-person interviews in clinical settings). As part of this
process, representative samples or groups of elder persons, caregivers, and
other family members should be surveyed to ascertain their attitudes on the
relative importance of the competing values at stake and the appropriate
responses to the dilemmas regarding disclosure of information bearing on
possible mistreatment.
     In the absence of more specific guidance emerging from such a consen-
sus process, the panel suggests that investigators undertake to obtain com-
munity guidance about some of the ethical difficulties raised by their par-
ticular protocols (see Levine, 1986; Melton et al., 1988, Strauss et al.,
2001). Whenever feasible, investigators should consult representative mem-
bers of the populations being studied (elder persons and caregivers, nursing
home residents and staff, etc.) to ascertain their perspectives and prefer-
ences regarding the proper responses to evidence of mistreatment (and the
related ethical issues raised by the proposed research) and should take this
information into account in developing the protocol.
     It appears that the biggest impediment to sensible and consistent reso-
lution of the ethical issues raised by elder mistreatment research is the
concern that state law requires researchers to report possible cases of mis-
treatment to public agencies. Under some circumstances involving clear
danger to the elderly subject, researchers may certainly feel ethically bound
to take preventive action, and sometimes this may require them to call adult
protective services authorities. However, evidence of mistreatment that
may be elicited during the interview is often not indicative of current dan-
ger, and there are many other ways in which ethically sensitive and caring
researchers can respond to such evidence. It should also be recognized that
reporting (and triggering an adult protective services investigation) can
have disruptive effects on the life of an elderly subject and may not be in his
or her best interests. For these reasons, in the panel’s view, evidence of
mistreatment elicited during research should not trigger a mandatory obli-
gation to report. Whatever may be thought of mandated reporting in
ordinary practice settings (see Chapter 7), it is too blunt a response in the
research context. Instead, whether the researchers should voluntarily take
protective action and, if so, whether such action should include reports to
RESEARCH ETHICS                                                                     145

public agencies should be determined by researchers and IRBs in the con-
text of the goals, setting, and methods of the particular study. Elder mis-
treatment reporting statutes should be amended to exempt researchers from
their mandatory requirements.
     The requirements otherwise imposed by state reporting statutes can be
overridden by a certificate of confidentiality issued by the National Insti-
tutes of Health (NIH) in accordance with federal law. In the panel’s view,
NIH should issue certificates of confidentiality designed to insulate elder
mistreatment researchers from any legal obligation to disclose possible cases
of mistreatment that otherwise may arise under state law, including tort
“duty to protect” obligations as well as reporting statutes. Issuance of
these certificates should be predicated on the assumption that IRBs will
carefully scrutinize the protocols to ensure that participants’ interests are
being protected from harm and that, under appropriate circumstances,
IRBs will permit investigators to take voluntary steps to protect subjects in
danger. (This point is discussed in greater depth below.)
     The panel is confident that the federally issued certificate of confidenti-
ality supersedes otherwise mandatory reporting requirements under state
law. Pursuant to §301(d) of the Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. §
241(d):
    The Secretary may authorize persons engaged in biomedical, behavioral,
    clinical, or other research (including research on mental health, including
    research on the use and effect of alcohol and other psychoactive drugs) to
    protect the privacy of individuals who are the subject of such research by
    withholding from all persons not connected with the conduct of such
    research the names or other identifying characteristics of such individuals.
    Persons so authorized to protect the privacy of such individuals may not
    be compelled in any Federal, State, or local civil, criminal, administrative,
    legislative, or other proceedings to identify such individuals.
Although some researchers have wondered whether a person is being “com-
pelled” to “identify” their subjects by a statutory reporting obligation for
child abuse or elder mistreatment (see Gray et al., 1995), it is clear that a
statutory reporting obligation, with penalties for failure to report, is a form
of compulsion, and that a report of the perpetrator inevitably identifies the
victim. It is also clear that a certificate of confidentiality issued pursuant to
this statute will supersede the state’s reporting obligation under the su-
premacy clause of the Constitution (under which federal law is the “su-
preme law of the land”).
     Although the issue has never been litigated in federal court, the
certificate’s authority has been recognized by the highest court of New
York in People v. Newman, 345 N.Y.S. 2d (1973) (certificate issued pursu-
ant to an equivalent provision in the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Preven-
146                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

tion and Control Act of 1970 protected Dr. Newman from a subpoena
requiring disclosure of pictures of patients receiving methadone).1 It should
also be noted that regulations issued by the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (2001b), to which courts would give considerable weight
in interpreting the federal statute, do not include state reporting obligations
in the list of disclosures permitted by a certificate of confidentiality. Fi-
nally, NIH guidelines pertaining to confidentiality certificates include the
following provisions:
      Background: Confidentiality Certificates are issued by NIH Institutes
      pursuant to Section 301 (d) of the Public Health Services Act (42 U.S.C.
      Section 241(d)) to afford special privacy protection to research subjects.
      A Certificate helps the researcher avoid compelled “involuntary disclo-
      sure” (e.g. subpoenas) of identifying information about a research subject.
      It does not prevent voluntary disclosures such as disclosure to protect the
      subject or others from serious harm, as in cases of child abuse. Also, a
      researcher may not rely on a Certificate to withhold data if the subject
      consents to the disclosure.
      Informing subjects about certificate: When a researcher obtains a Confi-
      dentiality Certificate, the subjects must be told about the protections af-
      forded by the Certificate, and any exceptions to that protection. This
      information is usually included in an “informed consent.”
      Need to adapt examples: Research subjects vary widely in their cultural
      and educational backgrounds. The language used should cover the basic
      points—privacy protection means that the subject will not be identified as
      participating in the study, unless the subject consents, or a disclosure is
      made to protect the subject or another from serious harm. Researchers
      may adapt the language to the special needs of their clientele, and to the
      subject matter of the study.
      Researchers should also review the language about confidentiality which
      is routinely included in consent forms to be sure that it is consistent with
      Confidentiality Certificate protections. For example, consent forms some-
      times refer to state law reporting requirements. However, HHS General



   1There are no cases involving elder reporting obligations. However, the attorney general
of Iowa, in Opinion 83-11-3 (1983), concluded that a federal confidentiality certificate super-
seded Iowa’s mandatory state child abuse reporting requirements. The supreme court of
Minnesota subsequently ruled that the preemptive effect of the federal law authorizing Health
and Human Services to issue confidentiality certificates for alcohol treatment research was
itself superseded by a subsequently enacted federal statute requiring states to enact child
abuse reporting statutes as a condition of receiving federal funds (State v. Andring, 342 N.W.
2d 128, 1984). It should be noted, however, that federal law does not require states to adopt
mandatory reporting as a condition of receiving federal funds for elder mistreatment or adult
protective services.
RESEARCH ETHICS                                                                147

    Counsel advises that such a disclosure would be voluntary, even though
    (otherwise) required by State law, because the Certificate protects the
    researcher from the compulsion of that law. Thus, note that the examples
    given simply state the circumstances in which disclosures would be made.
    [emphasis added]


Thus, NIH policy clearly supports the contention that certificates exempt
researchers from the obligation to report elder abuse under state reporting
statutes.
     Assuming that disclosure to public agencies is not mandated by law, the
next question is whether the research protocol itself should require or
permit such disclosure, and, if so, under what circumstances. In the panel’s
view, direct disclosure to public authorities should never be required by the
protocol, just as it should not be required by law. The better approach is to
ask the mistreated person (or the perpetrator, if that person has made the
disclosure) whether he or she would like to discuss the problem with a
clinician or other service provider and to refer the case if so authorized (or
if the person lacks the capacity to make an informed decision). Even if
counseling is declined, the person should be given written information
regarding available counseling and other services. Further protective ac-
tion, including reporting to public agencies, should be undertaken only if
the researcher (or the consulting clinician) has a substantial basis for believ-
ing that the elder person is in immediate danger of serious harm.
     These responses require delicate judgment and clinical sensitivity. It is
therefore in the principal investigators’ interests to train their interviewers
carefully and to specify procedures in advance for notifying the principal
investigator of disturbing disclosures of past mistreatment and concerns
about future danger. These concerns would be most likely to arise in face-
to-face interviews. Information elicited in a telephone interview is highly
unlikely to be so suggestive of future victimization as to warrant disclosure
without consent.
     A final question is whether the prospect of referral (without consent)
just described (or whatever approach is prescribed in the protocol) should
(or must) be disclosed to the prospective participants during the consent
process. The proper response probably varies across research contexts.
The Common Rule provides that an investigator seeking IRB approval to
omit information that ordinarily must be disclosed must establish that
participants will be exposed to no more than minimal risk; that waiving or
altering informed consent “will not adversely affect the rights and welfare
of the subjects;” and that the study would be “impracticable” if the infor-
mation had to be disclosed. These criteria raise two questions:
     First, does the residual possibility that the investigators or others could
notify authorities, leading to unwanted intervention, family disruption, or
148                                                           ELDER MISTREATMENT

other harm, amount to “more than a minimal risk” of harm to the partici-
pant? As Dresser (this volume) suggests, the answer to this question prob-
ably turns on whether the research is undertaken in a clinical or social
service setting in which the risk (of disclosure, especially under applicable
reporting laws) inheres in the clinical or service interaction, not in the
research itself. In such instances, the residual possibility that the researcher
might disclose evidence of mistreatment does not present a material risk
that must be disclosed in order to obtain informed consent. As Dresser
observes:
      In applying the Common Rule’s minimal risk and consent waiver provi-
      sions, the focus should be on whether research participation exposes older
      persons and caregivers to risks greater than those present in ordinary life
      and routine medical and social service encounters. For example, consider
      an interview study of family members caring for older individuals. If the
      study would expose participants to more detailed scrutiny than they would
      encounter in their usual interactions with the health care and social servic-
      es systems, and if investigators planned to report suspected maltreatment
      to protective services authorities, the study would present more than min-
      imal risk to study participants. The higher risk would exist because study
      participation would expose family members to reporting risks greater than
      those present in routine clinical and social services activities. If, however,
      data would be collected in interviews conducted as part of the ordinary
      activities of a social services agency, and the agency’s ordinary reporting
      practices would be followed, the research risks would appear not to ex-
      ceed the minimal risk threshold.
    Assuming that the risk is characterized as a minimal one, the second
question is whether disclosing it would unduly compromise the scientific
integrity of the study by skewing enrollment or the accuracy of responses.
Obviously, this question must be addressed in the context of a particular
study. However, waiver of the disclosure requirement would seem to be
especially warranted in studies aiming to provide accurate estimates of the
occurrence of elder mistreatment.


                                   CONCLUSION
     In general, it is the panel’s view that investigators and IRBs need clearer
guidance (without rigid rules) concerning two issues that tend to recur in
elder mistreatment research: conditions under which research can properly
go forward with participants whose decisional capacity is impaired, and the
proper responses to evidence of mistreatment elicited during the course of
the study. In the absence of better guidance, IRBs are left setting their own
criteria, leading to inconsistencies and confusion—the same IRB often in-
terprets the governing rules differently with each rotation of its chair. Co-
RESEARCH ETHICS                                                           149

operative research between agencies or organizations is also difficult, if not
impossible, since different IRBs often take different positions on these is-
sues, including what information must be disclosed to obtain informed
consent.
     As a first step in this direction, the panel has sought to clarify some of
the issues in these two areas and to provide some needed guidance. Eventu-
ally, the National Institute on Aging, in collaboration with the Office for
Human Research Protections and other federal partners, should take the
lead to promote further clarification, thereby helping investigators and
IRBs to achieve the proper level of participant protection while enabling
important research involving older and vulnerable adults to move forward.
In addition, NIH should continue to support research on assessing deci-
sional impairments and the adequacy of participant consent, on the effects
of interventions aiming to facilitate and sustain consent by subjects with
impairments, and on the nature and consequences of investigator and IRB
responses to disclosures of mistreatment during the course of a study.
                                      9


                       Moving Forward




                       K       nowledge about elder mistreatment will advance
only if its importance is recognized by policy makers and funding agencies,
if useful theories and methods are successfully extrapolated from relevant
disciplines and adjacent fields of research, and if adequate funding is avail-
able to support research careers in this field. The first of these conditions is
likely to be satisfied as the population ages and mistreatment becomes more
evident (a process that can be accelerated by conducting a sound study of
national prevalence). The second is most likely to be satisfied if research on
elder mistreatment is “located,” conceptually and operationally, in the
mainstream of research funding. The third will require a concerted effort
on the part of agencies that sponsor and regulate research.


           FROM THE MARGINS TO THE MAINSTREAM
     Recognizing that elder mistreatment crosses categorical boundaries in
both health research and social science research, federal funding agencies
(e.g., the National Institute on Aging, the Administration on Developmen-
tal Disabilities and Rehabilitation Research, and the National Institute of
Justice) should work collaboratively to promote research on the abuse
(physical and sexual) and financial exploitation of vulnerable adults, in-
cluding older persons as well as younger adults with disabilities.
     Another promising idea is to locate aspects of elder mistreatment re-
search relating to caregiving in the domain of quality assurance in long-
term care. According to the prevailing conceptualization of health care

                                     150
MOVING FORWARD                                                             151

quality (easily extended to other human services), patient (or client) safety
is one of the four components of quality in services (together with effective-
ness, patient-centeredness, and timeliness) (Institute of Medicine, 2001). It
is already understood that prevention of mistreatment is a core element of
quality assurance in nursing home regulation. However, as noted earlier,
80 percent of vulnerable elderly persons live in community settings, not in
nursing homes. Protecting elderly people in these settings, including their
own homes, represents a parallel challenge for policy makers and an over-
lapping agenda for researchers aiming to understand the phenomenology,
etiology, and consequences of mistreatment and the interventions that can
reduce it. By viewing elder mistreatment through the prism of quality
assurance (safety and security) in long-term care, it is possible to draw
together the frameworks and methods of researchers studying the needs of,
and services provided to, vulnerable elderly people in various long-term
care settings, as well as those used by researchers studying power and
conflict in human relationships (see Chapter 3).


                  BUILDING THE INFRASTRUCTURE
     Researchers currently in the field indicate that the ability to attract new
investigators is hampered by the lack of training funds. Both federal agen-
cies and private foundations should make funds available for both
predoctoral and postdoctoral training programs. Career advancement fund-
ing should be readily available to investigators who express an interest in
pursuing careers in elder mistreatment research. Foundations supporting
geriatric education in the professions should pay special attention to those
seeking funding or support for careers in elder mistreatment research.
     An adequate long-term funding commitment to research on elder mis-
treatment must be made by relevant federal, state, and private agencies to
support research careers and to develop the next generation of investigators
in the field.
     To help develop the research infrastructure of the field, several steps are
needed to remove barriers and create new opportunities:

     • The Office for Human Research Protections needs to work with
both experts in elder mistreatment and experts on human subjects protec-
tion to arrive at useful guidelines concerning research participation.
     • Research funding is needed from agencies other than those already
in the field. Most research on elder mistreatment has been supported by the
National Institute on Aging, the Administration on Aging, and offices within
the Department of Justice. Funding agencies with interests in aging or
disabled or vulnerable populations, or in health care delivery (especially
long-term care) and health/social policy research, should invest in research
152                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

in this important and understudied domain affecting older adults. For
example, the Administration on Developmental Disabilities and Rehabilita-
tion Research, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, or the
Center for Mental Health Services might be interested in supporting re-
search focusing on vulnerable adults who are often served by the adult
protective services system. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Qual-
ity may be interested in research on reducing elder mistreatment as a mea-
sure of quality improvements, not only in nursing homes, but also in the
entire range of long-term care settings. In addition, private foundations,
such as the American Health Assistance Foundation and the Andrus Foun-
dation, which support research on dementia and Alzheimer’s disease, should
be encouraged to make elder mistreatment research one of their priority
interests.
     • Within the grant review system, particularly on the federal level,
but within other funding sources as well, ways need to be found to incorpo-
rate experts in elder mistreatment into the review structure on a continuing
basis. Most review groups include no experts in the field of elder abuse.
New fields of interest or those in early stages of scientific development, such
as elder mistreatment, are probably disadvantaged in the scientific review
process in comparison to mature fields, especially when the review commit-
tees are not aware of the poorly developed state of knowledge. This prob-
lem can be ameliorated by ensuring that experts in the field participate in
the review of relevant applications, either as special consultants or as mem-
bers of the review groups.
     • Persons currently doing research and practicing in the field of elder
mistreatment need to disseminate the findings of their research and pro-
grammatic efforts in a more systematic and expeditious manner.


                               CONCLUSION
     Systematic implementation of these recommendations will help estab-
lish a sound foundation for advancing knowledge on elder mistreatment. A
genuine long-term commitment of resources to this important, though un-
derstudied, area will also help to recruit a new generation of scientists to the
field. By the same token, however, it is clear that, in the absence of the
kinds of investment recommended in this report, knowledge and under-
standing of elder mistreatment will remain thin, even as the population ages
and the occurrence of mistreatment increases. A substantial commitment
to research is needed to inform and guide a caring society as it aims to cope
with the challenges ahead.
                                   References




Administration on Aging
   1997      Facts on Long-Term Care. FS-97-4. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
             Health and Human Services.
Albertini, R.J.
   1998      Somatic mutations as multipurpose biomarkers. In Biomarkers: Medical and
             Workplace Applications, Mortimer L. Mendelsohn, Lawrence C. Mohr, and John
             P. Peters, eds. Washington, DC: Joseph Henry Press.
Alecxih, L., J. Corea, D.J. Gross, M.J. Gibson, C.F. Caplan, and N. Brangen
   1997      Out-of-Pocket Health Spending by Medicare Beneficiaries Age 65 and Older:
             1997 Projections. Washington, DC: American Association of Retired Persons.
American Medical Association
   1992      Diagnostic and Treatment Guidelines on Elder Abuse and Neglect. Chicago, IL:
             American Medical Association.
American Psychiatric Association
   1998      Guidelines for assessing the decision-making capacities of potential research sub-
             jects with cognitive impairment. American Journal of Psychiatry 155:1649-1650.
Anetzberger, G.
   1987      The Etiology of Elder Abuse by Adult Offspring. Springfield, IL: Charles C.
             Thomas.
Anetzberger, G.J., J.E. Korbin, and C. Austin
   1994      Alcoholism and elder abuse. Journal of Interpersonal Violence 9(2):184-193.
Anetzberger, G.J., B.R. Palmigano, M. Sanders, D. Bass, C. Dayton, S. Eckert, and M.R.
Schimer
   2000      A model intervention for elder abuse and dementia. The Gerontologist 40(4):492-
             497.
Ansello, E.E.
   1996      Causes and theories. In Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation of Older Persons: Strat-
             egies for Assessment and Intervention, L.A. Baumhover and S.C. Bell, eds. Balti-
             more, MD: Health Professions Press.

                                             153
154                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

Appelbaum, P., and T. Grisso
    1988     Assessing patients’ capacities to consent to treatment. New England Journal of
             Medicine 319:1635-1638.
Berg, J.W.
    1996     Legal and ethical complexities of consent with cognitively impaired research sub-
             jects: Proposed guidelines. Journal of Law, Medicine and Ethics 24:18-35.
Blenkner, M., M. Bloom, and R. Weber
    1974     Protective Services for Older People. Findings from the Benjamin Rose Institute
             Study. Cleveland, OH: Benjamin Rose Institute.
Bonnie, R.
    1997     Research with cognitively impaired subjects. Archives of General Psychiatry
             54:105-111.
Bowen, K.
    2000     Child abuse and domestic violence in families of children seen for suspected
             sexual abuse. Clinical Pediatrics 39(1):33-40.
Branch, L.G.
    2001     The Epidemiology of Elder Abuse and Neglect. Unpublished paper presented to
             the Panel on Elder Abuse and Neglect, Committee on National Statistics, October
             1, 2001. Durham, NC: Duke University School of Medicine.
Breckman, R.S., and R.D Adelman
    1988     Strategies for Helping Victims of Elder Mistreatment. Newbury Park, CA: Sage
             Publications.
Bristowe, E., and J.B. Collins
    1989     Family-mediated abuse of non-institutionalized elder men and women living in
             British Columbia. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 1(1):45-54.
Brookmeyer, R., S. Gray, and C. Kawas
    1998     Projections of Alzheimer’s disease in the United States and the public health
             impact of delaying disease onset. American Journal of Public Health 88(9):1337-
             1342.
Burgess, A.W., R.A. Prentky, and E.B. Dowdell
    2000     Sexual predators in nursing homes. Journal of Psychosocial Nursing 38:27-35.
Carter L.S., L.A. Weithorn, and R.E. Behrman
    1999     Domestic violence and children: Analysis and recommendations. The Future of
             Children 9(3):4-20.
Clark-Daniels, C.L., R.S. Daniels, and L.A. Baumhover
    1990     Abuse and neglect of the elderly: Are emergency department personnel aware of
             mandatory reporting laws? Annals of Emergency Medicine 19(9):970-977.
Cold, J., A. Petruckevitch, G. Feder, W-S. Chung, J. Richardson, and S. Moorey
    2001     Relation between childhood sexual and physical abuse and risk of revictimisation
             in women: A cross-sectional study. Lancet 358:450-455.
Comijs, H.C., A.M. Pot, H.H Smit, and C. Jonker
    1998     Elder abuse in the community: Prevalence and consequences. Journal of the
             American Geriatrics Society 46:885-888.
Compton, S.A., P. Flanagan, and W. Gregg
    1997     Elder abuse in people with dementia in Northern Ireland: Prevalence and predic-
             tors in cases referred to a psychiatry of old age service. International Journal of
             Geriatric Psychiatry 12(6):632-635.
Cooney, C., and A. Mortimer
    1995     Elder abuse and dementia: A pilot study. International Journal of Social Psy-
             chiatry 41(4):276-283.
REFERENCES                                                                                 155

Corder, L.
   2001     Survey Design Issues: Development of Elder Abuse Estimates. Unpublished pa-
            per presented to the Panel on Elder Abuse and Neglect, Committee on National
            Statistics, October 1, 2001. Durham, NC: Center for Demographic Studies,
            Duke University.
Coyne, A.C., W.E. Reichman, and L.J. Berbig
   1993     The relationship between dementia and elder abuse. American Journal of Psy-
            chiatry 150(4):643-646.
Davidson, J.L.
   1979     Elder abuse. In The Battered Elder Syndrome: An Exploratory Study, M.R.
            Block and J.D. Sinnott, eds. College Park, MD: Center on Aging, University of
            Maryland.
Davis R., and J. Medina-Ariza
   2001     Results from an Elder Abuse Prevention Experiment in New York City. Re-
            search in Brief. Washington DC: National Institute of Justice.
Davis, R., and B.G. Taylor
   1997     A proactive response to family violence: The results of a randomized experiment.
            Criminology 35(2): 307-333.
Dolan R., and B. Blakely
   1989     Elder abuse and neglect: A study of adult protective service workers in the United
            States. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect I:31-49.
Dresser, R.
   1996     Mentally disabled research subjects: The enduring policy issues. Journal of the
            American Medical Association 276:67-72.
   1999     Research involving persons with mental disabilities: A review of policy issues and
            proposals. In National Bioethics Advisory Commission, Research Involving Per-
            sons with Mental Disorders That May Affect Decisionmaking Capacity vol. 2
            Bethesda, MD: National Bioethics Advisory Commission.
   2001     Dementia research: Ethics and policy for the twenty-first century. Georgia Law
            Review 35:661-690.
Dube S.R., R.F. Anda, V.J. Felitti, D.P. Chapman, D.F. Williamson, and W.H. Giles
   2001     Child abuse, household dysfunction, and the risk of attempted suicide throughout
            the life span. Journal of the American Medical Association 286:3089-3096.
Dyer, C.B., M.S. Gleason, K.P. Murphy, V.N. Pavlik, B. Portal, T. Reger, and D.J. Hyman
   1999     Treating elder neglect: Collaboration between a geriatrics assessment team and
            adult protective services. Southern Medical Journal 92(2):242-244.
Eberhardt, M.S., D.D. Ingram, D.M. Makuc, et al.
   2001     Urban and Rural Health Chartbook. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for
            Health Statistics.
Edleson, J.L.
   2000     Studying the co-occurrence of child maltreatment and woman battering in fami-
            lies. In Intimate Violence in the Lives of Children: The Future of Research,
            Intervention, and Social Policy, S.A. Graham-Bermann and J.L. Edleson, eds.
            Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Engels, G.L.
   1977     The need for a new medical model: A challenge for bio-medicine. Science
            196:129-136.
Ensel, W.M., and N. Lin
   2000     Age, the stress process, and physical distress: The role of distal stressors. Journal
            of Aging and Health 12(2):136-168.
156                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

Fiegener, J.J., M. Fiegener, and J. Meszaros
   1989      Policy implications of a statewide survey on elder abuse. Journal of Elder Abuse
             and Neglect 1(2):39-58.
Fisher B.S., F.T. Cullen, and M.G. Turner
   2000      The Sexual Victimization of College Women. National Institute of Justice, NCJ
             182369. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.
Freedman V.A., and L.G. Martin
   1999      The role of education in explaining and forecasting trends in functional limita-
             tions among older Americans. Demography 36(4): 461-473.
Fulmer, T., and B. Gurland
   1996      Restriction as elder mistreatment: Differences between caregiver and elder per-
             ceptions. Journal of Mental Health and Aging 2:89-98.
Fulmer, T., and T. Wetle
   1986      Elder abuse screening and intervention. Nurse Practitioner 11(5):33-38.
Fulmer, T., and T.A. O’Malley
   1987      Inadequate Care of the Elderly: A Health Care Perspective on Abuse and Ne-
             glect. New York: Springer.
Gordis, L.
   1996      Epidemiology. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Grafstrom, M., A. Nordberg, and B. Winblad
   1993      Abuse is in the eye of the beholder. Scandinavian Journal of Social Medicine
             21(4):247-255.
Gray, J., P.M. Lyons, and G.B. Melton
   1995      Ethical and Legal Issues in AIDS Research. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
             University Press.
Greenberg, J.R., M. McKibben, and J.A. Raymond
   1990      Dependent adult children and elder abuse. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect
             2:73-86.
Grisso, T., and P. Appelbaum
   1998      Assessing Competence to Consent to Treatment: A Guide for Physicians and
             Other Health Professionals. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hajjar, I., and E. Duthie, Jr.
   2001      Prevalence of elder abuse in the United States: A comparative report between the
             national and Wisconsin data. Wisconsin Medical Journal 100(6):22-26.
Harrell, R., C.H. Torongo, J. McLaughlin, V.N. Pavlik, D.J. Hyman, and C.B. Dyer
   2002      How geriatricians identify elder abuse and neglect. American Journal of Medical
             Science 323(1):34-38.
Harrington, C., M. LaPlante, R.J. Newcomer, B. Bedney, S. Shostak, P. Summers, J. Weinberg,
and I. Basnett
   2000      A review of Federal Statutes and Regulations for Personal Care and Home and
             Community-Based Services: A Final report. Unpublished paper. San Francisco:
             University of California, Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences.
Hawes, C., M. Rose, and C.D. Phillips
   1999      A National Study of Assisted Living for the Frail Elderly: Results of a National
             Survey of Facilities. Beachwood, OH: Myers Research Institute.
Hawes, C., D. Blevins, and L. Shanley
   2001      Preventing Abuse and Neglect in Nursing Homes: The Role of the Nurse Aide
             Registries. Report to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (formerly
             HCFA) from the School of Rural Public Health. College Station, TX: Texas
             A&M University System Health Science Center.
REFERENCES                                                                                157

Henderson, S.
    1998      Epidemiology of dementia. Annals de Medicine Interne (Paris) 149(4):181-186.
Hetzel, L., and A. Smith
    2001      The 65 Years and Over Population: 2000. Report No. C2KBR/01-10. Eco-
              nomic and Statistic Administration, Bureau of the Census. Washington, DC: U.S.
              Department of Commerce.
Hickey, T., and R.L. Douglass
    1981      Mistreatment of the elderly in the domestic setting: An exploratory study. Ameri-
              can Journal of Public Health 71(5):500-507.
Himes, C.L., A.K. Jordan, and J.I. Farkas
    1996      Factors influencing parental caregiving by adult women: Variations in care inten-
              sity and duration. Research on Aging 18:349-370.
Hoffman, D., and J. Schwartz
    1998      Proxy consent to participation of the decisionally impaired in medical research—
              Maryland’s policy initiative. Journal of Health Care Law and Policy 1:123-153.
Homer, A.C., and C. Gilleard
    1990      Abuse of elderly people by their caregivers. British Medical Journal 301(6765):
              1359-1362.
House, J.S., D. Umberson, and K.R. Landis
    1988      Structures and processes of social support. Annual Review of Sociology 14:293-
              318.
Hwalek, M.A., M.C. Sengstock, and R. Lawrence
    1984      Assessing the Probability of Abuse of the Elderly. Paper presented at the 37th
              Annual Scientific Meeting of the Gerontological Society of America, San Antonio,
              TX.
Hwalek, M.A., and M.C. Sengstock
    1986      Hwalek-Sengstock Elder Abuse Screening Test-Revised. Journal of Applied Ger-
              ontology 5(2):153-173.
Institute of Medicine
    1996      Nursing Staff in Hospitals and Nursing Homes: Is It Adequate? Committee on
              the Adequacy of Nursing Staff in Hospitals and Nursing Homes. G.S.
              Wunderlich, F.A. Sloan, and C.K. Davis, eds. Washington, DC: National Acad-
              emy Press.
    1997      The Hidden Epidemic: Confronting Sexually Transmitted Diseases. Thomas R.
              Eng and William T. Butler, eds. Committee on Prevention and Control of Sexu-
              ally Transmitted Diseases, Institute of Medicine. Washington, DC: National
              Academy Press.
    1999      Reducing the Burden of Injury: Advancing Prevention and Treatment. Commit-
              tee on Injury Prevention and Control. Richard J. Bonnie, Carolyn E. Fulco, and
              Catharyn T. Liverman, eds. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
    2001      Improving the Quality of Long-Term Care. Committee on Improving Long-
              Term Care, Division of Health Care Services. Gooloo S. Wunderlich and Peter
              O. Kohler, eds. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Jones J.S., J.P. Veenstra, J.P. Seamon, and J. Krohmer
    1997      Elder mistreatment: National survey of emergency physicians. Annals of Emer-
              gency Medicine 30(4):473-479.
Kelman C., and L. Smith
    2000      It’s time: Record linkage—the vision and the reality. Australian and New Zealand
              Journal of Public Health 24(1):100-101.
158                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

Kempe, C., F. Silverman, B. Steele, W. Droegemueller, and H. Silver
   1962      The battered-child syndrome. Journal of the American Medical Association
             181:17-24.
Kim, S., E.D. Caine, G.W. Currier, A. Leibovici, and J.M. Ryan
   2001      Assessing the competence of persons with Alzheimer’s disease in providing in-
             formed consent for participation in research. American Journal of Psychiatry
             158:712-717.
Kivela, S.L., P. Kongas-Saviaro, E. Kesti, K. Pahkala, and M.L. Ijas
   1992      Abuse in old age: Epidemiological data from Finland. Journal of Elder Abuse
             and Neglect 4(3):1-18.
Lachs, M.S., L. Berkman, T. Fulmer, and R. Horwitz
   1994      A prospective community-based pilot study of risk factors for the investigation of
             elder mistreatment. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 42(2):169-173.
Lachs, M.S., and K. Pillemer
   1995      Abuse and neglect of elderly persons. New England Journal of Medicine
             333(7):437.
Lachs, M.S., C. Williams, S. O’Brien, L. Hurst, and R. Horwitz
   1996      Older adults. An 11-year longitudinal study of adult protective service use. Ar-
             chives of Internal Medicine 156(4):449-453.
   1997a Risk factors for reported elder abuse and neglect: A nine-year observational
             cohort study. The Gerontologist 37(4):469-474.
Lachs, M.S., C.S. Williams, S. O’Brien, L. Hurst, A. Kossack, A. Siegal, and M.E. Tinetti
   1997b ED use by older victims of family violence. Annals of Emergency Medicine
             30(4):448-454.
Langlois, N.E.I., and G.A. Gresham
   1991      The ageing of bruises: A review and study of the colour changes with time.
             Forensic Science International 50:227-238.
Laumann, E.O., J. Gagnon, R.T. Michael, and S. Michaels
   1994      The Social Organization of Sexuality: Sexual Practices in the United States.
             Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Laumann, E.O., and Y. Youm
   2001      Racial/ethnic group differences in the prevalence of sexually transmitted diseases
             in the United States: A network approach. In Sex, Love, and Health in America:
             Private Choices and Public Policies, Edward O. Laumann and Robert T. Michael,
             eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Levine, R.
   1986      Ethics and regulations of clinical research. Baltimore, MD: Urban and
             Schwarzenberg.
Lin, N., X. Ye, and W.M. Ensel
   1999      Social support and depressed mood: A structural analysis. Journal of Health and
             Social Behavior 40:344-359.
Mahay, J., E.O. Laumann, and S. Michaels
   2001      Race, gender, and class in sexual scripts. In Sex, Love, and Health: Private
             Choices and Public Policies, Edward O. Laumann and Robert T. Michael, eds.
             Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Malone, M.L., N. Rozario, M. Gavinski, and J. Goodwin
   1991      The epidemiology of skin tears in the institutionalized elderly. Journal of the
             American Geriatric Society 39:591-595.
Marson, D., K. Ingram, H. Cody, and L. Harrell
   1995      Assessing the competency of patients with Alzheimer’s disease under different
             legal standards: A prototype instrument. Archives of Neurology 52:949-954.
REFERENCES                                                                                159

Manton K.G., L. Corder, and E. Stallard
  1997      Chronic disability trends in elderly United States populations: 1982-1994. Pro-
            ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
            94(6):2593-2598.
Melton, G.B.
  2002      Chronic neglect of family violence: More than a decade of reports to guide U.S.
            policy. Paper presented to the Center for Child and Family Policy, Duke Univer-
            sity, May 15, 2002.
Melton, G., and F. Barry, eds.
  1994      Protecting Children from Abuse and Neglect. New York: Guilford Press.
Melton, G.B., J. Petrila, N.G. Poythress, and C. Slobogin
  1997      Psychological Evaluations for the Courts: A Handbook for Mental Health Pro-
            fessionals and Lawyers 2nd ed. New York: Guilford.
Melton, G., R. Levine, G. Koocher, R. Rosenthal, and W. Thompson
  1988      Community consultation in socially sensitive research: Lessons from clinical trials
            of treatments for AIDS. American Psychology 43:573-581.
Melton, G., and A.B. Andrews
  2000      Building systems for safety in the family: The U.S experience. New Global
            Development. Journal of International and Comparative Social Welfare 16:24-
            25.
Melton, G., R. Thompson, and M. Small
  2001      Toward a Child-Centered Neighborhood-Based Child Protection System.
            Westport, CT: Praeger Press.
Moody, L., A. Voss, and C.A. Lengacher
  2000      Assessing abuse among the elderly living in public housing. Journal of Nursing
            Measurement 8(1):61-70.
Myers, J.E.B.
  1993      The competence of young children to testify in legal proceedings. Behavioral
            Science and the Law 11:121.
National Association of Adult Protective Services Administrators
  2002      Adult Protective Services Ethical Principles and Best Practice Guidelines. Avail-
            able at: http://www.elderabusecenter.org/publication/ethics.pdf. [July 8, 2002].
National Bioethics Advisory Commission
  1998      Research Involving Persons with Mental Disorders That May Impair
            Decisionmaking Capacity vol. 1. Bethesda, MD: National Bioethics Advisory
            Commission.
  2001      Ethical and Policy Issues in Research Involving Human Participants: Report and
            Recommendations. Bethesda, MD: National Bioethics Advisory Commission.
National Center on Elder Abuse
  1998      The National Elder Abuse Incidence Study, Final Report. Prepared for the Ad-
            ministration on Aging in collaboration with Westat, Inc.
National Institute of Justice
  2000      Elder Justice: Medical Forensic Issues Concerning Abuse and Neglect. Summary
            of a Roundtable, October 18, 2000, Washington, DC.
National Research Council
  1988      The Aging Population in the Twenty-First Century. Statistics for Health Policy.
            Committee on National Statistics. Dorothy M. Gilford, ed. Commission on Be-
            havioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Acad-
            emy Press.
  1993      Understanding and Preventing Violence. Panel on the Understanding and Con-
            trol of Violent Behavior. Albert J. Reiss, Jr., and Jeffrey A. Roth, eds. Commis-
            sion on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: Na-
            tional Academy Press.
160                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

   1996     Understanding Violence Against Women. Panel on Research on Violence Against
            Women. Nancy A. Crowell and Ann W. Burgess, eds. Commission on Behav-
            ioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy
            Press.
    2000a Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a Work-
            shop. Committee on National Statistics, Christopher Mackie and Norman
            Bradburn, eds. Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Wash-
            ington, DC: National Academy Press.
    2000b Cells and Surveys: Should Biological Measures Be Included in Social Science
            Research? Committee on Population. Caleb E. Finch, James W. Vaupel, and
            Kevin Kinsella, eds. Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
            Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
    2001    Confronting Chronic Neglect: The Education and Training of Health Profession-
            als on Family Violence. Committee on the Training Needs of Health Profession-
            als to Respond to Family Violence. Felicia Cohn, Marla E. Salmon, and John D.
            Stobo, eds. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council and the Institute of Medicine
    1998    Understanding Child Abuse and Neglect. Panel on Research on Child Abuse and
            Neglect, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Wash-
            ington, DC: National Academy Press.
Nelson, B.
    1984    Making an Issue of Child Abuse. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Newberger, E.
    1998    Child abuse. In Public Health and Preventive Medicine, R.B. Wallace, editor.
            Stamford, CT: Appleton and Lange.
Nielsen C., and R.S. Lang
    1999    Principles of screening. Medical Clinics of North America 83(6):1323-1337.
Noelker L.S., and D.M. Bass
    1995    Service use by caregivers of elderly receiving case management. Journal of Case
            Management 4:156-161.
Ogg, J.
    1993    Researching elder abuse in Britain. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 5(2):
            37-54.
Ogg, J., and G.C.J. Bennett
    1992    Elder abuse in Britain. British Medical Journal 305:998-999.
Paveza G.J., D. Cohen, C. Eisdorfer, S. Freels, T. Semla, W. Ashford, P. Gorelick, R.
Hirschman, D. Luchins, and P. Levy
    1992    Severe family violence and Alzheimer’s disease: Prevalence and risk factors. The
            Gerontologist 32:493-497.
Pavlik, V.N., D.J. Hyman, N.A. Festa, and C.B. Dyer
    2001    Quantifying the problem of abuse and neglect in adults: Analysis of a statewide
            database. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 49(1):45-48.
Peddle, N., and C.T. Wang
    2001    Current Trends in Child Abuse Prevention Reporting and Fatalities: The 1999
            Fifty State Survey. Chicago: Prevent Child Abuse America.
Pelton, L.
    1994    The role of material factors in child abuse and neglect. In Protecting Children
            from Abuse and Neglect, Gary Melton and Frank Barry, eds. New York:
            Guilford Press.
REFERENCES                                                                              161

Pepper, C., and M.R. Okar
    1981     Elder Abuse: An Examination of a Hidden Problem. Pub. No. 97-277. Wash-
             ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Phillips, L.R.
    1983     Abuse and neglect of the frail elderly at home: An exploration of theoretical
             relationships. Journal of Advanced Nursing 8:379-392.
Pillemer, K.A.
    1985     The dangers of dependency: New findings on domestic violence against the
             elderly. Social Problems 33(2):146-158.
    1986     Risk factors in elder abuse: Results from a case-control study. In Elder Abuse:
             Conflict in the Family, K.A. Pillemer and R.S. Wolf, eds. Dover, DE: Auburn
             House Publishing Company.
    1988     Maltreatment of patients in nursing homes: Overview and research agenda. Jour-
             nal of Health and Social Behavior 29(September):227-238.
    2001     Critical Research Needs in the Study of Elder Abuse. Unpublished paper pre-
             sented to the Panel on Elder Abuse and Neglect, Washington, DC, May 24, 2000.
             Ithaca, NY: Department of Human Development, Cornell University.
Pillemer, K., and R. Bachman-Prehn
    1991     Helping and hurting: Predictors of maltreatment of patients in nursing homes.
             Research on Aging 13:74-95.
Pillemer, K.A., and D. Finkelhor
    1988     The prevalence of elder abuse: A random sample survey. The Gerontologist
             28(1):51-57.
    1989     Causes of elder abuse: Caregiver stress versus problem relatives. American Jour-
             nal of Orthopsychiatry 59:179-187.
Pillemer, K., and B. Hudson
    1993     A model abuse prevention program for nursing assistants. The Gerontologist
             33:128-131.
Pillemer, K., and D.W. Moore
    1989     Abuse of patients in nursing homes: Findings from a survey of staff. The Geron-
             tologist 29:314-320.
Pillemer, K., and J.J. Suitor
    1992     Violence and violent feelings: What causes them among family givers? Journal of
             Gerontology 47:S165-S172.
Platt, A.M.
    1969     The Child Savers. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Podnieks, E.
    1992     National Survey on Abuse of the Elderly in Canada. Journal of Elder Abuse and
             Neglect 41(1/2):5-58.
Population Projections Program
    2000     Population Projections of the United States by Age, Sex, Race, Hispanic Origin,
             and Nativity: 1999 to 2100. [Available at: http://ftp.census.gov/population/
             projections/nation/detail/np-d5-cd.txt.]
Quayhagen, M., M.P. Quayhagen, T.L. Patterson, M. Irwin, R. L. Hauger, and I. Grant
    1997     Coping with dementia: Family caregiver burnout and abuse. Journal of Mental
             Health and Aging 3:357-364.
Reay, A.M., and K.D. Browne
    2001     Risk factors for caregivers who physically abuse or neglect their elderly depen-
             dents. Aging and Mental Health 5(1):56-62.
162                                                              ELDER MISTREATMENT

Reis, M., D. Nahmiash, and R. Schrier
    1993     The Brief Abuse Screen for the Elderly. Paper presented at the 22nd Annual
             Scientific and Educational Meeting of the Canadian Association on Gerontology,
             Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Reis, M., and D. Nahmiash
    1995     Validation of the caregiver abuse screen (CASE). Canadian Journal of Aging
             14:45-60.
    1998     Validation of the indicators of abuse (IOA) screen. The Gerontologist 38(4):471-
             480.
Rice, D.P., H.M. Fillit, W. Max, D.S. Kropman, J.R. Lloyd, and S. Duttagupta
    2001     Prevalence, costs, and treatment of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementia: A
             managed care perspective. American Journal of Managed Care 7(8):809-818.
Rich, J.S., and H.C. Sox
    2000     Screening in the elderly: Principles and practice. Hospital Practice (Office Edi-
             tion) 35(10):45-48, 53-56.
Sandefur, R., and E.O. Laumann
    1998     A paradigm for social capital. Rationality and Society (November) 10:481-501.
Saywitz, K.J., G.S. Goodman, and T.D. Lyon
    2002     Interviewing children in and out of court: Current research and practice implica-
             tions. In The APSAC Handbook on Child Maltreatment 2nd ed., J.E.B. Myers,
             L. Berliner, J. Briere, C.T. Hendrix, C. Jenny, and T.A. Reid, eds. Thousand
             Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Schechter, S., and J.L. Edleson
    1999     Effective Intervention in Domestic Violence and Child Maltreatment: Guidelines
             for Policy and Practice. Reno, NV: National Council of Juvenile and Family
             Court Judges.
Schiamberg, L.B., and D. Gans
    1999     Elder abuse by adult children: An applied ecological framework for understand-
             ing contextual risk factors and the intergenerational character of the quality of
             life. International Journal of Aging and Human Development 50:329-359.
Schoeni R.F., V.A. Freedman, and R.B. Wallace
    2001     Persistent, consistent, widespread, and robust? Another look at recent trends in
             old-age disability. Journals of Gerontology Series B-Psychological Sciences &
             Social Sciences 56(4):S206-218.
Schulz R., and S.R. Beach
    1999     Caregiving as a risk factor for mortality: The Caregiver Health Effects Study.
             Journal of the American Medical Association 282(23):2215-2219.
Simon, W., and J.H. Gagnon
    1987     A sexual scripts approach. In Theories of Human Sexuality, W.T. O’Donohue
             and J.H. Greer, eds. New York: Plenum.
Spitzer, R.L.
    1983     Psychiatric diagnosis: Are clinicians still necessary? Comprehensive Psychiatry
             24:399-411.
Stark, E., and A.H. Flitcraft
    1998     Woman battering. In Public Health and Preventive Medicine, R.B. Wallace, ed.
             Stamford, CT: Appleton and Lange.
Steinmetz, S.K.
    1988     Duty Bound: Elder Abuse and Family Care. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publica-
             tions.
REFERENCES                                                                               163

Stone, R.I.
    2000    Long-Term Care for the Elderly With Disabilities: Current Policy, Emerging
            Trends, and Implications for the Twenty-First Century. New York: Milbank
            Memorial Fund.
Straus, M.A.
    1978    The Conflict Tactic Scale. Reprinted in Handbook of Family Measurement Tech-
            niques, J. Touliatos, B. Perlmutter, and M. Straus, eds. Newbury Park, CA: Sage
            Publications.
Straus, M.A., and R.J Gelles
    1990    Physical Violence in American Families. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Pub-
            lishers.
    1992    National Family Violence Survey: Wife battering and violence outside the family.
            Journal of Interpersonal Violence 7:462-470.
Strauss, R.P., S. Sengputa, S.C. Quinn, J. Goeppinger, C. Spaulding, S.M. Kegeles, and G.
Millett
    2001    The role of community advisory boards: Involving communities in the informed
            consent process. American Journal of Public Health (12)91:1938-1943.
Thomas, C.
    2000    First national study of elder abuse and neglect: Contrast with results from other
            studies. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 12(1):1-14.
Timmreck, T.C.
    1998    An Introduction to Epidemiology. Boston: Jones & Bartlett Publishers.
Tornstam, L.
    1989    Abuse of the elderly in Denmark and Sweden: Results from a population study.
            Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 1(1):35-44.
U.S. Advisory Board on Child Abuse and Neglect
    1990    Child Abuse and Neglect: Critical First Steps in Response to a National Emer-
            gency. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
    1993    The Continuing Child Protection Emergency: A Challenge to the Nation. Wash-
            ington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
    1966    State letter No. 925. Subject: Four Model Demonstration Projects…Services to
            Older Adults in the Public Welfare Program. Cited in District of Columbia,
            1967, Protective Services for Adults: Report on Protective Services Prepared for
            the D.C. Interdepartmental Committee on Aging, Washington, DC.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
    2001a Federal policy for the protection of human subjects (Common Rule). Code of
            Federal Regulations 45:§46.
    2001b Protection of identity—Research subjects. Code of Federal Regulations 42:§2a.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
    1999    Protection of human subjects. Code of Federal Regulations 21:Parts 50 and 56.
U.S. General Accounting Office
    2002    Nursing Homes: More Can Be Done to Protect Residents from Abuse, GAO-02-
            312. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Weisberg, D.
    1984    The discovery of sexual abuse. University of California (Davis) Law Review
            18:1-57.
Williamson, G.M., and D.R. Shaffer
    2001    Caregiver loss and quality of care provided: Pre-illness relationship makes a dif-
            ference. In Loss and Trauma: General and Close Relationship Perspectives, J.H.
            Harvey and E.D. Miller, eds. Philadelphia: Brunner/Mazel.
164                                                              ELDER MISTREATMENT

Wisconsin Department of Health and Family Services
   2001     Adult Protective Services Modernization Project Report. Available at: http://
            www.dhfs.state.wi.us/aps/.
Wolf, R.
   1997a Elder abuse and neglect: Causes and consequences. Journal of Geriatric Psychia-
            try 30(1):153-174.
   1997b Factors Affecting the Rate of Elder Abuse Reporting to a State Protective Services
            Program. Washington, DC: National Committee for the Prevention of Elder
            Abuse.
   1999     A Research Agenda on Abuse of Older Persons and Adults with Disabilities.
            Available at: http://www.preventelderabuse.org/professionals/r_agenda.html.
Wolf, R.S., M. Godkin, and K.A. Pillemer
   1984     Elder Abuse and Neglect: Findings from Three Model Projects. Worcester, MA:
            University of Massachusetts Medical Center, University Center on Aging.
Wolf, R.S., and K. Pillemer
   1989     Helping Elderly Victims: The Reality of Elder Abuse. New York: Columbia
            University Press.
Wolf, R.S., and D. Li
   1999     Factors affecting the rate of elder abuse reporting to a state protective services
            program. The Gerontologist 39(2):222-228.
Wolf, R.S., C.P. Strugnell, and M.A. Godkin
   1982     Preliminary Findings from Three Model Projects on Elderly Abuse, Center on
            Aging. Worcester, MA: University of Massachusetts Medical Center.
      APPENDIX
         A
Elder Mistreatment
Measures and Studies




         165
166                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

TABLE A-1 Elder Mistreatment Measures
Measure               Summary                 Characteristics          Properties

Pathophysiological    Uses items such as      Subjective and           Poor sensitivity
signs and symptoms    unexplained bruising,   objective clinical       and specificity.
Fulmer (1984)         dehydration, urine      observations as
Lachs and Fulmer      burns, fractures.       documented by
(1993)                                        health care
Dyer et al. (2000)                            clinicians.
Haviland and
O’Brien (1989)
O’Brien (1986)

Conflict Tactic Scale Perception of           19-item self-report,     Chronbach’s alpha
Straus (1978)         upsetting and           e.g., “Has anyone        reliability: 0.88.
                      injurious               threatened you with      Content
                      circumstances in a      a knife or gun?”         validity 0.80.
                      person’s life.                                   Available in
                                                                       Spanish.

Elder Assessment      Provides information    40-item screening        Content
Instrument            to clinicians to        tool with both           validity 0.83.
Fulmer (1984)         better inform           subjective and           Interrater
                      judgments about         objective items to       agreement 0.84.
                      risk of elder           determine if an older    Available in
                      mistreatment.           person should be         Spanish.
                                              referred for suspected
                                              elder mistreatment.

The QUALCARE          Assessment of six       53-item observational    Extensive
Scale                 areas: physical,        rating scale designed    psychometrics
Phillips et al.       medical management,     to quantify and          reported:
(1990a, 1990b)        psychosocial,           qualify family           Interrater
                      environmental,          caregiving.              agreement range:
                      human rights, and                                0.79-0.88.
                      financial.                                       Chronbach’s alpha:
                                                                       0.81-0.95 on
                                                                       6 subscales.

Hwalek-Sengstock      Assessment of           15-item assessment       Discriminant
Elder Abuse           physical, financial,    screen for detecting     function analysis:
Screening Test        psychological, and      suspected elder          9 items identified
Neale et al. (1991)   neglectful              abuse and neglect.       94% of cases.
                      situations.                                      Three conceptual
                                                                       domains: violation
                                                                       of personal rights,
                                                                       characteristics of
                                                                       vulnerability, and
                                                                       potentially abusive
                                                                       situations.
APPENDIX A                                                                        167

TABLE A-1 Continued
Measure               Summary                 Characteristics      Properties

Fulmer Restriction    Assessment of           34-item scale        Chronbach’s
Scale                 physical,               designed to elicit   alpha: 0.78.
Fulmer and Gurland    psychological, and      information          Interrater
(1996)                financial restriction   regarding            agreement: 0.93.
                      of older adults.        unnecessary          Available in
                                              restriction of the   Spanish.
                                              older adult.

Indicators of Abuse   Developed               29-item set of       Discriminant
Screen                specifically for use    indicators for use   function analysis:
Reis and Nahmiash     by social service       by social service    29 items identified
(1998)                agency practitioners    agency               96.3% of cases.
                      likely to visit the     practitioners to     Factor analysis: no
                      older adult in the      identify elder       reliable pattern of
                      home.                   mistreatment.        variable clusters.

Adult Protective      Intake forms used to No specific format.     No psychometrics
Service Reports       document calls of                            available.
                      suspected elder
                      mistreatment from
                      public hot lines and
                      state agencies.
168                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

TABLE A-2 Elder Mistreatment Studies
Study                  Methods                       Selected Findings

Childs et al. (2000)   Design: Descriptive           Middle-aged respondents
                       Measure: (1) SVWS;            viewed psychological
                       (2) EAA BIS-R                 behavior more harshly than
                       Sample: Nonrandom:            younger respondent.s
                       422 young and 201             Both middle-aged women
                       middle-aged adults            and young men were less
                       Theory: N/A                   tolerant of middle-aged
                                                     perpetrators.
                                                     Data support relativistic
                                                     nature of elder abuse.

Coyne et al. (1993)    Design: Descriptive survey    Mean age of caregiver 56.1;
                       Measure: Demographics;        54.5% were adult children
                       Zarit Burden interview;       caring for parents; 37.1%
                       Zung Self-Rating              caring for spouses; 8.4%
                       Depression Scale              cared for other relatives.
                       Sample: 1,000 caregivers      11.9% reported they had
                       who called a telephone        been physically abusive
                       help line for dementia;       toward dementia patients.
                       342 respondents               Abusers had been providing
                                                     care for more years; patients
                                                     functioned at a lower level;
                                                     caregivers had higher burden
                                                     and depression scores.

Dyer et al. (2000)     Design: Case-control study    45 cases of abuse or neglect
                       Intervention:                 identified.
                       Comprehensive geriatric       37 were self-neglect.
                       assessment                    Elder mistreatment cases
                       Measure: Standard geriatric   were more likely to be white
                       assessment tools              and male.
                       Sample: 47 older persons      Higher prevalence of
                       referred for neglect and 97   depression and dementia.
                       referred for other reasons

Ertem et al. (2000)    Design: Descriptive           10 studies: 4 cohort, 1
                       Method: Meta-analysis         cross-sectional, and 5 case-
                       Sample: 10 studies            control.
                                                     The RR of maltreatment in
                                                     children of abused parents
                                                     were significantly increased
                                                     in 4 studies (RR 4.75-37.8).
                                                     In 3 other studies the RR
                                                     was less than 2.
                                                     Significant validity issues.
APPENDIX A                                                                        169

TABLE A-2 Continued
Study                      Methods                      Selected Findings

Fulmer and Gurland (1996) Design: Descriptive           Cognitive impairment risk
                          Measure: CTS, FRS and         factor for elder
                          NMAP Survey, Beck             mistreatment.
                          Depression Scale, BDBS        CTS higher for CI patients.
                          Sample: 125 elder-caregiver   FRS higher for CI patients.
                          dyads; 51 dyads with          CI patients more dependent.
                          cognitive impairment and      CI patients had higher
                          74 dyads with no cognitive    BDBS.
                          impairment; mean age of       CI patients had higher Zarit
                          the elder 78 years            Burden scores.
                          Theory: Risk and
                          vulnerability

Fulmer et al. (1999)       Design: Descriptive          Prevalence of elder
                           Method: Analysis of a        mistreatment 12.3%.
                           probability sample of        Apprehensive behavior was
                           ADHC clients in New          highest reported behavior;
                           York State. Social workers   with this item removed,
                           served as informants.        prevalence 3.6%.
                           Sample: 9 sites drawn        Social workers noted
                           through random sampling      concern regarding elders
                                                        who appeared frightened in
                                                        the presence of their home
                                                        caregiver.

Fulmer et al. (2000)       Design: Descriptive          36 patients eligible for
                           Measure: EAI, MMSE           study.
                           Sample: 180 emergency        7 patients screened positive
                           department patients over     for neglect.
                           the age of 70 with MMSE      Nurses were able to screen
                           of 18 or greater             for elder neglect with greater
                                                        than 70% accuracy; true
                                                        positive 71%, false positive
                                                        7%.

Huber et al. (2001)        Design: Descriptive          5 most frequent complaints
                           Method: Analysis of          were (1) loss of dignity and
                           cross-sectional 6-state      respect; (2) accidents; (3)
                           ombudsman database           physical abuse; (4) call lights
                           Sample: 23,787 complaints    unanswered; (5) poor
                                                        personal hygiene.
                                                        Race and gender differences
                                                        noted.

Hudson (1991)              Design: Descriptive          Agreement on a 5-level
                           Measure: 3-round Delphi      taxonomy.
                           survey                       11 theoretical definitions
                           Sample: 63 elder             proposed by panel.
                           mistreatment experts
170                                                      ELDER MISTREATMENT

TABLE A-2 Continued
Study                   Methods                        Selected Findings

Hwalek et al. (1996)    Design: Descriptive            73% of victims were
                        Method: Database analysis      women.
                        Measure: Risk of Future        Mean age 77 (60-99).
                        Abuse instrument               Caucasian 73%; widowed
                        Sample: State of Illinois      54%; living at home 76%.
                        Abuse, Neglect and             Caregiver substance abuse
                        Exploitation Tracking          more likely to involve
                        System; 2,577 cases from       physical or emotional abuse.
                        October 1989 to December
                        1991. 552 substantiated
                        reports used for this study

Jogerst et al. (2000)   Design: Descriptive            Community characteristics
                        Method: Analysis of            that had a positive
                        county-level data between      association with rates of
                        1984 and 1993 to test          reported or substantiated
                        association between county     elder mistreatment were:
                        characteristics and rates of   (1) population density;
                        elder abuse                    (2) children in poverty;
                        Sample: 99 counties in Iowa    (3) reported child abuse.
                        Analysis: univariate
                        correlational analysis and
                        stagewise linear regression

Jones et al. (1997)     Design: Descriptive            52% of respondents
                        Method: Random sample          described elder mistreatment
                        survey                         as prevalent but less than
                        Sample: 3,000 members of       spouse or child abuse.
                        the American College of        Respondents evaluated a
                        Emergency Physicians;          mean of 4 ± 8 suspected
                        705 completed surveys          cases of elder mistreatment
                        (response rate 24%)            in the last 12 months;
                                                       50% were reported.

Lachs et al. (1994)     Design: Prospective cohort     68 (2.4%) of database
                        study                          cohort members received
                        Method: Case matching          ombudsman investigation.
                        with adult protective          Risk factors for elder
                        services database              mistreatment investigation
                        Sample: 329 elders             using logistic regression
                        investigated in 1985 and       included requiring assistance
                        1986                           with feeding OR 3.5, being
                        Analysis: Relative risk        a minority elder OR 2.3,
                        calculations                   over age 75 at cohort
                                                       inception OR 1.9, and poor
                                                       social networks OR 1.7.
APPENDIX A                                                                    171

TABLE A-2 Continued
Study                  Methods                      Selected Findings

Lachs et al. (1997a)   Design: Prospective cohort   47 cohort members were
                       study                        seen for elder mistreatment
                       Method: Case matching        (prevalence 1.6%).
                       with adult protective        Age, race, poverty,
                       services database            functional disability, and
                       Sample: 184 cohort           cognitive impairment were
                       members                      identified as risk factors for
                       Analysis: Pooled logistic    reported elder mistreatment,
                       regression                   with ORs reported.
                                                    The onset of new cognitive
                                                    impairment was also
                                                    associated with abuse and
                                                    neglect.
                                                    The influence of race and
                                                    poverty is likely to be
                                                    overestimated due to
                                                    reporting bias.

Lachs et al. (1997b)   Design: Prospective cohort   114 individuals accounted
                       study                        for 628 visits (median 3,
                       Method: 7-year               range 1-46).
                       longitudinal database with   30.6% resulted in hospital
                       identification of 182        admission.
                       victims of elder abuse       66% had at least one visit
                       Sample: 114 elders seen in   that resulted in an injury-
                       2 emergency departments      related chief complaint.

Lachs et al. (1998)    Design: Prospective cohort   Cohort members seen for
                       study                        elder mistreatment at any
                       Measure: mortality among     time during follow up had
                       elders for whom protective   poorer survival (9%) than
                       services were used to        others.
                       corroborate mistreatment     Reported and corroborated
                       and elderly persons for      elder mistreatment and
                       whom protective services     self-neglect are associated
                       were used for self-neglect   with shorter survival after
                       Sample: 176 adult            adjusting for other factors
                       protective services elders   associated with increased
                                                    mortality in older adults.
172                                                       ELDER MISTREATMENT

TABLE A-2 Continued
Study                      Methods                      Selected Findings


Moody et al. (2000)        Design: Descriptive          Principal components FA of
                           Measure: H-S/EAST            15-item instrument
                           Sample: 100 black,           supported the 3-factor
                           Hispanic, and white elders   structure for a total of 10
                           living in public housing     items explaining 38% of the
                                                        variance.
                                                        Discriminant function
                                                        analysis showed that 6 items
                                                        were as effective as the
                                                        9-item model in classifying
                                                        cases as abused (71.4%).

National Center on Elder   Design: Descriptive study    551,000 elder mistreatment
Abuse at the American      Method: Incidence study      cases in 1996.
Public Human Services      using sentinel agency        Female elders are abused at
Association [formerly      reports                      higher rates than males.
American Public Welfare    Sample: 20 counties in 15    The oldest elders (80 years
Association] in            states: nationally           and older) are abused and
collaboration with         representative sample        neglected at 2-3 times their
Westat, Inc. (1998)                                     proportion in the elderly
                                                        population.
                                                        In almost 90% of elder
                                                        mistreatment cases, the
                                                        perpetrator is a family
                                                        member and 2/3 are adult
                                                        children or spouses.
                                                        Victims of self-neglect are
                                                        usually depressed, confused,
                                                        or extremely frail.

O’Malley et al. (1984)     Design: Descriptive          Cases divided into three
                           Measure: Case analysis       categories: (1) extremely
                           using OARS                   impaired who receive care
                           Sample: 24 cases from        from individuals responsible
                           primary care clinic          for abuse and neglect (N =
                                                        4); (2) impaired elders who
                                                        receive inadequate or
                                                        intermittent care (N = 9);
                                                        (3) involved independent
                                                        elders whose only care needs
                                                        resulted from threats or
                                                        violence from relatives
                                                        (N = 11).
APPENDIX A                                                                        173

TABLE A-2 Continued
STudy                      Methods                       Selected Findings


Paveza et al. (1992)       Design: Descriptive           Severe family violence as
                           Measure: CTS                  measured by the CTS was a
                           Sample: Purposive sample      significant problem: overall
                           from Alzheimer’s disease      prevalence 17.4%.
                           registry: 184 patients        15.8% of patients had been
                                                         violent since diagnosis.
                                                         5.4% of caregivers reported
                                                         being violent toward the
                                                         patient.
                                                         Violence by the Alzheimer’s
                                                         disease patient against the
                                                         caregiver was serious
                                                         problem.

Pavlik et al. (2001)       Design: Descriptive           Neglect accounted for 80%
                           Method: Analysis of Texas     of allegations.
                           Department of Protective      The incidence of being
                           and Regulatory Services,      reported to adult protective
                           Adult Protective Services     services increased sharply
                           Sample: 62,258 allegations    after age 65.
                           of elder mistreatment in      Prevalence was 1,310 over
                           1997                          100,000 > 65 years of age.

Phillips and Rempusheski   Design: Descriptive           4-stage model describing
(1985)                     Method: Interviews with       decisions of health care
                           grounded theory analysis      providers about elder abuse.
                           Sample: 29 health care        Model identifies 3 types of
                           providers (16 nurses and      decisions: diagnostic, value,
                           13 social workers)            and intervention.
                                                         Complexity of decision
                                                         processes is revealed via
                                                         5 pathways.

Phillips et al. (1990a)    Design: Adaptation of the     QUALCARE Scale contains
                           QUALPACS                      six subscales and 53 items.
                           Method: Instrument            Included in 6 subscales:
                           development                   environmental, physical,
                           Sample: Piloted with 8        medical maintenance,
                           data collectors (4 in each    psychological, human rights,
                           of 2 sites) who interviewed   and financial.
                           4 elder-caregiver dyads. A
                           total of 29 elder-caregiver
                           dyads were interviewed
174                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

TABLE A-2 Continued
Study                     Methods                     Selected Findings


Phillips et al. (1990b)   Design: Descriptive         Interrater reliability for 55
                          correlational study         observations ranged from
                          Measure: QUALCARE           79% to 88%.
                          Sample: Convenient sample   Internal consistency:
                          of 249 elder-caregiver      alpha = .097.
                          dyads                       Conceptual structure:
                                                      confirmatory factor analysis
                                                      indicated 6 significant
                                                      factors accounting for
                                                      64.4% of the variance.
                                                      Criterion validity: all
                                                      correlations between criteria
                                                      variables and QUALCARE
                                                      were in correct direction and
                                                      p < 0.05 level.
                                                      Construct validity: 8 of 9
                                                      correlations in the predicted
                                                      direction.

Pillemer and Finkelhor    Design: Descriptive         63 elder persons were
(1988)                    Method: Stratified random   maltreated.
                          sample survey               Rate of 32 per 1,000.
                          Sample: 2,020 community-    95% confidence interval of
                          dwelling elders in          25-39 per 1,000.
                          metropolitan Boston         No minority differences or
                                                      age differences.
                                                      Those in poor health were 3
                                                      to 4 times likely to be
                                                      abused.
                                                      Males were more likely to
                                                      be abused than females.

Pillemer and Finkelhor    Design: Descriptive         Factors associated with elder
(1989)                    Method: Case control        mistreatment included
                          Sample: 46 abuse or         abuser factors of deviance,
                          neglect victims and 215     dependence on victim, and
                          random controls             life stress.
                                                      Victim factors included
                                                      court help, disability,
                                                      dependence on abuser, and
                                                      conflictual relationship
                                                      (spouse only).
APPENDIX A                                                                          175

TABLE A-2 Continued
Study                        Methods                       Selected Findings


Pillemer and Moore (1989) Design: Descriptive              36% of the sample had seen
                          Measure: CTS                     at least one incident of
                          Sample: 577 nursing              physical abuse in the
                          personnel from 31 nursing        preceding year.
                          homes in New Hampshire           Most frequent abuse
                                                           observed was excessive
                                                           restraint.
                                                           Second most frequent type
                                                           was physical abuse.
                                                           81% observed at least one
                                                           psychologically abusive
                                                           incident in the preceding
                                                           year.
                                                           10% of respondents
                                                           reported committing
                                                           physical abuse.
                                                           40% of respondents
                                                           reported committing
                                                           psychological abuse.

Pillemer and Suitor (1992)   Design: Descriptive           Characteristics predictive of
                             Method: Analysis of           violent feelings in caregivers
                             quantitative and              included physical aggression
                             qualitative data              by elder, disruptive
                             Sample: 236 family            behaviors, and a shared
                             caregivers for dementia       living situation.
                             victims                       Structural relationship and
                                                           caregiver age were related to
                                                           actual violence: spouses were
                                                           more likely to be violent
                                                           than other relatives, as were
                                                           older individuals.
                                                           Violence by elder was
                                                           positively related to
                                                           caregiver violence.

Rosenblatt et al. (1996)     Design: Descriptive           17,238 of cases were older
                             Method: Analysis of State     than age 65.
                             of Michigan records of        Physicians reported only 2%
                             reported cases of suspected   of cases.
                             elder abuse 1989–1993         Physician reporting rates did
                             Sample: 27,371 cases of       not increase over a 5-year
                             possible elder mistreatment   period.
176                                                       ELDER MISTREATMENT

TABLE A-2 Continued
Study                      Methods                      Selected Findings



Shaw (1998)                Design: Descriptive          The two types of abusive
                           Method: Grounded theory      nursing home staff were
                           Sample: 21 semistructured    identified as reactive and
                           interviews conducted with    sadistic.
                           six abuse investigators
                           and 15 nursing home staff

Wolf (1986)                Design: Descriptive          Victims and nonabuse clients
                           Method: Analysis of cases    were similar in age, sex, and
                           from an elder mistreatment   health status.
                           intervention project         Caretakers for both groups
                           Sample: 59 elder             were similar in age and
                           mistreatment cases           health status.
                           compared with 49 cases       More perpetrators were
                           randomly selected from a     males.
                           nonabuse caseload            A majority of elder
                                                        mistreatment cases resided
                                                        with family members versus
                                                        nonabused persons living
                                                        alone.
                                                        Victims and perpetrators
                                                        had more psychological and
                                                        emotional health problems.
                                                        Abused elders did not
                                                        appear to be more
                                                        dependent.

Wolf and Pillemer (1997)   Design: Descriptive          Wives more likely to be
                           Measure: ADLs, IADLs,        dependent on husbands for
                           CTS                          IADLs.
                           Sample: 73 older women:      Adult children more likely to
                           22 victimized by husbands    be dependent on mothers
                           and 51 victimized by adult   for housing and finances.
                           children                     Husbands more likely to use
                                                        physical violence against
                                                        wives than adult children
APPENDIX A                                                                    177

TABLE A-2 Continued
Study                     Methods                    Selected Findings

                                                     against mothers.
Wolf and Li (1999)        Design: Descriptive        Rate of reports varied from
                          Measure: DV was number     a low of 2.41 per 1,000
                          of reports per 1,000       through 9.31 per 1,000.
                          persons age 60 years and   Higher rates of reporting
                          older during 1994          were associated with lower
                          Sample: 27 geographical    socioeconomic status, more
                          areas in Massachusetts     community training, higher
                                                     agency service rating scores,
                                                     lower community agency
                                                     relationship score.

SOURCE: Adapted from Fulmer (2002).
178                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

                                     REFERENCES

Childs, H.W., B. Hayslip, Jr, L.M. Radika, and J.A. Reinberg
   2000      Young and middle-aged adults’ perceptions of elder abuse. The Gerontologist
             40(1):75-85.
Coyne, A.C., W.E. Reichman, and L.J. Berbig
   1993      The Relationship Between Dementia and Abuse. American Journal of Psychiatry
             150(4):643-646.
Dyer, C.B., V.N. Pavlik, K.P. Murphy, and D.J. Hyman
   2000      The high prevalence of depression and dementia in elder abuse or neglect. Jour-
             nal of the American Geriatrics Society 48(2):205-208.
Ertem, I.O., J.M. Leventhal, and S. Dobbs
   2000      Intergenerational continuity of child physical abuse: How good is the evidence?
             Lancet 356(9232):814-9.
Fulmer, T.
   1984      Elder abuse assessment tool. Dimensions of Critical Care Nursing 3(4):216-220.
   2002      Elder mistreatment. In Annual Review of Nursing Research: Focus on Geriatric
             Nursing, vol. 20. P. Archbold and B. Stewart, eds. New York: Springer.
Fulmer, T., and V.M. Cahill
   1984      Assessing elder abuse: A study. Journal of Gerontological Nursing 10(12):16-
             20.
Fulmer, T., and B. Gurland
   1996      Restriction as elder mistreatment: Differences between caregiver and elder per-
             ceptions. Journal of Mental Health and Aging 2:89-98.
Fulmer, T., G. Paveza, I. Abraham, and S. Fairchild
   2000       Elder neglect assessment in the emergency department. Journal of Emergency
             Nursing 26(5):436-443.
Fulmer, T., M. Ramirez, S. Fairchild, D. Holmes, M.J. Koren, and J. Teresi
   1999      Prevalence of elder mistreatment as reported by social workers in a probability
             sample of adult day health care clients. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect
             11(3):25-36.
Haviland, S., and J. O’Brien
   1989      Physical abuse and neglect of the elderly: Assessment and intervention. Orthope-
             dic Nursing 8(4):11-19.
Huber, R., K. Borders, F.E. Netting, and H.W. Nelson
   2001      Data from long-term care ombudsman programs in six states: The implications
             of collecting resident demographics. The Gerontologist 41(1):61-68.
Hudson, M.F.
   1991      Elder mistreatment: A taxonomy with definitions by Delphi. Journal of Elder
             Abuse and Neglect 3(2):1-20.
Hwalek, M., A. Neale, C. Goodrich, and K. Quinn
   1996      The association of elder abuse and substance abuse in the Illinois Elder Abuse
             System. The Gerontologist 36(5):694-700.
Jogerst, G.J., J.D. Dawson, A. J. Hartz, J.W. Ely, and L.A. Schweitzer
   2000      Community characteristics associated with elder abuse. Journal of the American
             Geriatrics Society 48(5):513-518.
Jones, J.S., T.R. Veenstra, J.P. Seamon, and J. Krohmer
   1997       Elder mistreatment: National survey of emergency physicians. Annals of Emer-
             gency Medicine 30(4):473-479.
APPENDIX A                                                                                179

Lachs, M.S., L. Berkman, T. Fulmer, and R. Horwitz
    1994     A prospective community-based pilot study of risk factors for the investigation of
             elder mistreatment. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 42(2):169-73.
Lachs, M.S., and T. Fulmer
    1993     Recognizing elder abuse and neglect. Clinical Geriatric Medicine 9(3):665-81.
Lachs, M.S., C. Williams, S. O’Brien, L. Hurst, and R.I. Horwitz
    1997a Risk factors for reported elder abuse and neglect: A nine-year observational
             cohort study. The Gerontologist 37(4):469-474.
Lachs, M.S., C.S.Williams, S. O’Brien, L. Hurst, A. Kossack, A. A. Siegal, and M.E. Tinetti
    1997b ED use by older victims of family violence. Annals of Emergency Medicine
             30(4):448-454.
Lachs, M. S., C.S. Williams, S. O’Brien, K.A. Pillemer, and M.E. Charlson
    1998     The mortality of elder mistreatment. Journal of the American Medical Associa-
             tion 280(5):428-432.
Moody, L. E., A. Voss, and C.A. Lengacher
    2000     Assessing abuse among the elderly living in public housing. Journal of Nursing
             Measurement 8(1):61-70.
The National Center on Elder Abuse
    1998     The National Elder Abuse Incidence Study Final Report: Washington, DC: Na-
             tional Center on Elder Abuse.
Neale, A., M. Hwalek, R. Scott, M. Sengstock, and C. Stahl
    1991     Validation of the Hwalek-Sengstock Elder Abuse Screening Test. Journal of
             Applied Gerontology 10(4):406-418.
O’Brien, J. G.
    1986     Elder abuse and the physician. Michigan Medical Journal 85(11):618, 620.
O’Malley, T.A., H.C. O’Malley, D.E. Everitt, and D. Sarson
    1984     Categories of family-mediated abuse and neglect of elderly persons. Journal of
             the American Geriatrics Society 32(5):362-9.
Paveza, G.J., D. Cohen, C. Eisdorfer S. Freels, T. Semla, J.W. Ashford, P. Gorelick, R.
Hirschman, D.J. Luchins, and P. Levy
    1992     Severe family violence and Alzheimer’s disease: Prevalence and risk factors. The
             Gerontologist 32(4):493-497.
Pavlik, V.N., D.J.Hyman, N.A. Festa, and C. Bitondo Dyer
    2001     Quantifying the problem of abuse and neglect in adults—analysis of a statewide
             database. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 49(1):45-48.
Phillips, L.R., E.F. Morrison, and Y.M. Chae
    1990a The QUALCARE Scale: Developing an instrument to measure quality of home
             care. International Journal of Nursing Studies 27(1), 61-75.
    1990b The QUALCARE Scale: Testing of a measurement instrument for clinical prac-
             tice. International Journal of Nursing Studies 27(1):77-91.
Phillips, L.R., and V.F. Rempusheski
    1985     A decision-making model for diagnosing and intervening in elder abuse and ne-
             glect. Nursing Research 34(3):134-139.
Pillemer, K.A., and D. Finkelhor
    1988     The prevalence of elder abuse: A random sample survey. The Gerontologist,
             28(1):51-57.
Pillemer, K.A., and D. Finkelhor
    1989     Causes of elder abuse: Caregiver stress versus problem relatives. American Jour-
             nal of Orthopsychiatry 59(2):179-187.
180                                                              ELDER MISTREATMENT

Pillemer, K.A., and D.W. Moore
    1989    Abuse of patients in nursing homes: Findings from a survey of staff. The Geron-
            tologist 29(3):314-320.
Pillemer, K. A., and J.J. Suitor
    1992    Violence and violent feelings: What causes them among family caregivers? Jour-
            nal of Gerontological Nursing 47(4):S165-S172.
Reis, M., and D. Nahmiash
    1998    Validation of the indicators of abuse (IOA) screen. The Gerontologist 38(4):471-
            480.
Rosenblatt, D. E., K.H. Cho, and P.W. Durance
    1996    Reporting mistreatment of older adults: The role of physicians. Journal of the
            American Geriatrics Society 44(1):65-70.
Shaw, M.M.C.
    1998    Nursing home resident abuse by staff: Exploring the dynamics. Journal of Elder
            Abuse and Neglect 9(4):1-21.
Straus, M..A.
    1978    The Conflict Tactic Scale. Reprinted in Handbook of Family Measurement Tech-
            niques, J. Touliatos, B. Perlmutter, and M. Straus, editors. Newbury Park, CA:
            Sage.
Tatara, T
    1993    Understanding the nature and scope of domestic elder abuse with the use of state
            aggregate data: Summaries of key findings of a national survey of state APS and
            aging agencies. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 5:35-57.
Wolf, R.S.
    1986    Major findings from three model projects on elderly abuse. In Elder Abuse:
            Conflict in the Family, K.A. Pillemer and R.S. Wolf, eds. Dover MA: Auburn
            House Publishing.
Wolf, R.S., and D. Li
    1999    Factors affecting the rate of elder abuse reporting to a state protective services
            program. The Gerontologist 39(2):222-228.
Wolf, R.S., and K.A. Pillemer
    1997    The older battered woman: wives and mothers compared. Journal of Mental
            Health & Aging 3(3):325-336.
                               APPENDIX
                      B
    Analysis of Elder Abuse and Neglect
       Definitions Under State Law
                          Lora Flattum Hamp




ALABAMA: Code of Ala. § 38-9-2 (2001)

“Abuse” means the infliction of physical pain, injury, willful deprivation by
a caregiver or other person of services necessary to maintain mental and
physical health.

  Defined separately: Emotional abuse is the willful or reckless inflic-
  tion of emotional or mental anguish or the use of a physical or chemi-
  cal restraint, medication or isolation as punishment or as a substitute
  for treatment or care of any protected person. Sexual abuse includes
  any conduct that is a crime as defined in § 13A-6-60 to § 13A-6-70 of
  the Code of Alabama.

“Neglect” means the failure of a caregiver to provide food, shelter, cloth-
ing, medical services, or health care for the person unable to care for self; or
the failure of person to provide these needs for self as result of mental or
physical inability.

“Exploitation” means expenditure, diminution, use of property, assets, or
resources of protected person without the express voluntary consent of that
person or that person’s legally authorized representative.

“Adult in need of protective services” means a person 18 years of age or
older whose behavior indicates that he or she is mentally incapable of

                                     181
182                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

adequately caring for himself or herself and his or her interests without
serious consequences to himself or herself or others, or who, because of
physical or mental impairment, is unable to protect himself or herself from
abuse, neglect, exploitation, sexual abuse, or emotional abuse by others,
and who has no guardian, relative, or other appropriate person able, will-
ing, and available to assume the kind and degree of protection and supervi-
sion required under the circumstances.

“Caregiver” means an individual who has the responsibility for care of a
protected person as a result of family relationship or who has assumed the
responsibility for care of the person voluntarily by contract or as a result of
the ties of friendship.


ALASKA: Alaska Stat. § 47.24.900 (2001)

“Abuse” means willful, intentional, reckless, nonaccidental, and nonthera-
peutic infliction of physical pain injury or mental distress or sexual assault.

“Neglect” means the intentional failure by a caregiver to provide essential
care or services necessary to maintain the physical and mental health of the
vulnerable adult. Self-neglect includes an act or omission by a vulnerable
adult that results or could result in the deprivation of essential services
necessary to maintain minimal mental, emotional, or physical health and
safety.

“Exploitation” means the unjust or improper use of another person or
another person’s resources for one’s own profit or advantage.

“Vulnerable adult” means a person 18 years of age or older who, because
of physical or mental impairment, is unable to meet person’s own needs or
to seek help without assistance.

“Caregiver” means a person providing care to a vulnerable adult as a result
of family relationship; or who has assumed responsibility for the care of a
vulnerable adult voluntarily, by contract, or by court order; or an employee
of an out-of-home care facility who provides care to one or more vulnerable
adults.
APPENDIX B                                                              183

ARIZONA: A.R.S. § 46-451 (2000); A.R.S. § 13-3623 (2001)

“Abuse” under § 46-451 and § 13-3623 means the intentional infliction of
physical harm; injury caused by negligent acts or omissions; unreasonable
confinement; sexual abuse or sexual assault.

  Defined separately under § 13-3623: Emotional abuse means a pat-
  tern of ridiculing or demeaning a vulnerable adult, making derogatory
  remarks to a vulnerable adult, verbally harassing a vulnerable adult,
  or threatening to inflict physical or emotional harm on a vulnerable
  adult. Physical injury means the impairment of physical condition
  and includes any skin bruising, pressure sores, bleeding, failure to
  thrive, malnutrition, dehydration, burns, fracture of any bone, subdu-
  ral hematoma, soft tissue swelling, injury to any internal organ, or
  any physical condition that imperils health or welfare.

“Neglect” under § 46-451 means a pattern of conduct without the person’s
informed consent resulting in deprivation of food, water, medication, medi-
cal services, shelter, cooling, heating, or other services necessary to main-
tain minimum physical or mental health.

“Exploitation” under § 46-451 means the illegal or improper use of an
incapacitated or vulnerable adult or his resources for another’s profit or
advantage.

“Vulnerable adult” under § 46-451 and § 13-3623 means an individual
who is 18 years of age or older who is unable to protect himself from abuse,
neglect, or exploitation by others because of a physical or mental impair-
ment.


ARKANSAS: A.C.A. § 5-28-101 (2001)

“Abuse” means any intentional or unnecessary physical act which inflicts
pain on or causes injury to endangered or impaired adult, including sexual
abuse; or any intentional or demeaning act which subjects an endangered or
impaired adult to ridicule; or psychological injury in manner likely to pro-
voke fear or harm.

Defined separately: Sexual abuse means deviate sexual activity, sexual
contact, or sexual intercourse, as those terms are defined in § 5-14-101,
with another person who is not the actor’s spouse and who is incapable of
184                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

consent because he or she is mentally defective, mentally incapacitated, or
physically helpless, as those terms are defined in § 5-14-101.

“Neglect” means acts or omissions by an endangered adult; for example,
self-neglect or intentional acts or omissions by a caregiver responsible for
the care and supervision of an endangered or impaired adult constituting:
(a) Negligently failing to provide necessary treatment, rehabilitation, care,
food, clothing, shelter, supervision, or medical services to an endangered or
impaired adult; (b) Negligently failing to report health problems or changes
in health problems or changes in the health condition of an endangered or
impaired adult to the appropriate medical personnel; or (c) Negligently
failing to carry out a prescribed treatment plan.

“Exploitation” means the illegal use or management of endangered or
impaired adult’s funds, assets, or property, or the use of an endangered or
impaired adult’s person, power of attorney, or guardianship for the profit
or advantage of himself, herself, or another.

“Endangered adult” means an adult 18 years of age or older who is found
to be in a situation or condition which poses an imminent risk of death or
serious bodily harm to that person and who demonstrates a lack of capacity
to comprehend the nature and consequences of remaining in that situation
or condition; or a resident 18 years of age or older of a long-term care
facility which is required to be licensed under § 20-10-224, who is found to
be in a situation or condition which poses imminent risk of death or serious
bodily harm to the person and who demonstrates the lack of capacity to
comprehend the nature and consequences of remaining in that situation or
condition. “Impaired adult” means a person 18 years or older who, as a
result of mental or physical impairment, is unable to protect himself or
herself from abuse, sexual abuse, neglect, or exploitation, and as a conse-
quence thereof is endangered.

“Caregiver” means a related or unrelated person, owner, agent, high mana-
gerial agent of a public or private organization, or public or private organi-
zation that has responsibility for protection, care, or custody of an endan-
gered or impaired adult as a result of assuming the responsibility voluntarily,
by contract, through employment, or by order of the court.


CALIFORNIA: Cal. Wel. & Inst. Code §§ 15610.07, 15610.30, 15610.57
(2001); Cal. Pen. Code § 368 (2001)

“Abuse of an elder or dependent adult” under § 15610.07 includes physical
abuse, neglect, financial abuse, abandonment, isolation, abduction, or other
APPENDIX B                                                                185

treatment with resulting physical harm or pain or mental suffering; the
deprivation by a care custodian of goods or services that are necessary to
avoid physical harm or mental suffering.

“Abuse” under Cal. Pen. Code § 368 occurs when any person who, under
circumstances or conditions likely to produce great bodily harm or death,
willfully causes or permits any elder or dependent adult, with knowledge
that he or she is an elder or a dependent adult, to suffer, or inflicts thereon
unjustifiable physical pain or mental suffering, or having the care or cus-
tody of any elder or dependent adult, willfully causes or permits the person
or health of the elder or dependent adult to be injured, or willfully causes or
permits the elder or dependent adult to be placed in a situation in which his
or her person or health is endangered.

“Neglect” under § 15610.17 includes (1) negligent failure of any person
having the care or custody of elder of a dependent adult to exercise that
degree of care that a reasonable person in a like position would exercise; (2)
negligent failure of person themselves to exercise that degree of care that a
reasonable person in a like position would exercise.

“Financial abuse” under § 15610.30 occurs when a person or entity does
any of the following: (1) Takes, secretes, appropriates, or retains real or
personal property of an elder or dependent adult to a wrongful use or with
intent to defraud, or both; (2) assists in taking, secreting, appropriating, or
retaining real or personal property of an elder or dependent adult to a
wrongful use or with intent to defraud, or both.

“Elder” under Cal. Pen. Code § 368 means any person residing in this state,
65 years of age or older.

“Dependent adult” under Cal. Pen. Code § 368 means any person residing
in this state, between the ages of 18 and 64 years, who has physical or
mental limitations that restrict his or her ability to carry out normal activi-
ties or to protect his or her rights including, but not limited to, persons who
have physical or developmental disabilities or whose physical or mental
abilities have diminished because of age; includes any person between the
ages of 18 and 64 who is admitted as an inpatient to a 24-hour health
facility, as defined in Sections 1250, 1250.2, and 1250.3 of the Health and
Safety Code.

“Caretaker” under Cal. Pen. Code § 368 means any person who has the
care, custody, or control of, or who stands in a position of trust with, an
elder or a dependent adult.
186                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

COLORADO: C.R.S. §§ 18-6.5-102, 26-3.1-101 (2001)

“Mistreatment” under § 26-3.1-101 means an act or omission which threat-
ens health, safety, or welfare of an at-risk adult…or which exposes the
adult to a situation or condition that poses an imminent risk of death,
serious bodily injury or bodily injury to the adult. Includes but is not
limited to (a) Abuse which occurs: (I) Where there is infliction of physical
pain or injury, as demonstrated by, but not limited to, substantial or mul-
tiple skin bruising, bleeding, malnutrition, dehydration, burns, bone frac-
tures, poisoning, subdural hematoma, soft tissue swelling, or suffocation;
(II) Where unreasonable confinement or restraint is imposed; or (III) Where
there is subjection to nonconsensual sexual conduct or contact classified as
a crime under the “Colorado Criminal Code” title 18, C.R.S; (b) Caretaker
neglect which occurs when adequate food, clothing, shelter, psychological
care, physical care, medical care, or supervision is not secured for the at-
risk adult or is not provided by a caretaker in a timely manner and with the
degree of care that a reasonable person in the same situation would exer-
cise; except that the withholding of artificial nourishment in accordance
with the “Colorado Medical Treatment Decision Act,” article 18 of title 15,
C.R.S., shall not be considered as abuse; (c) Exploitation which is the illegal
or improper use of an at-risk adult for another person’s advantage.

“Caretaker neglect” under § 26-3.1-101 and § 18-6.5-102 occurs when
adequate food, clothing, shelter, psychological care, physical care, medical
care, or supervision is not secured for the at-risk adult or is not provided by
a caretaker in a timely manner and with degree of care that a reasonable
person in the same situation would exercise. Self-neglect (defined sepa-
rately): act or failure to act whereby an at-risk adult substantially endangers
the adult’s health, safety, welfare, or life by not seeking or obtaining ser-
vices necessary to meet the adult’s essential human needs. Choice of lifestyle
or living arrangements shall not, by itself, be evidence of self-neglect:

“Exploitation” under § 26-3.1-101 means the illegal or improper use of an
at-risk adult for another person’s advantage.

“At-risk adult” under § 26-3.1-101 means an individual 18 years of age or
older who is susceptible to mistreatment …or self-neglect as such term is
defined because individual is unable to perform or obtain services necessary
for individual’s health, safety, or welfare or lacks sufficient understanding
or capacity to make or communicate responsible decisions concerning the
individual’s person or affairs. “At-risk adult” under § 18-6.5-102 means
any person who is 60 years of age or older or any person who is 18 years of
age or older and is a person with a disability.
APPENDIX B                                                                 187

“Caretaker” under § 26-3.1-101 means a person who is responsible for
care of at-risk adult as a result of family or legal relationship or who has
assumed responsibility for the care of an at-risk adult.


CONNECTICUT: Conn. Gen. Stat. § 17b-450 (2001)

“Abuse” includes, but is not limited to, willful infliction of physical pain,
injury, or mental anguish, or the willful deprivation by a caretaker of
services which are necessary to maintain physical or mental health.

“Neglect” refers to an elderly person who is either living alone and not able
to provide for oneself the services which are necessary to maintain physical
and mental health or is not receiving the said necessary services from the
responsible caretaker.

“Exploitation” refers to the act or process of taking advantage of an elderly
person by another person or caretaker whether for monetary, personal, or
other benefit, gain, or profit.

“Elderly person” means a resident of Connecticut who is 60 years of age or
older.

“Caretaker” means a person who has the responsibility for the care of an
elderly person as a result of a family relationship or who has assumed the
responsibility for the care of the elderly voluntarily, by contract, or by order
of a court of competent jurisdiction.


DELAWARE: 31 Del. C. § 3902 (2000); 16 De. C. § 1131 (2000)

“Abuse” under § 3902 includes physical abuse by unnecessarily inflicting
pain or injury on an infirm adult; or a pattern of emotional abuse, which
includes, but is not limited to, ridiculing or demeaning an infirm adult,
making derogatory remarks to an infirm adult, or cursing or threatening to
inflict physical or emotional harm on an infirm adult.

  INSTITUTIONAL ABUSE: “Abuse” under § 1131 includes (a) physi-
  cal abuse by unnecessarily inflicting pain or injury to a patient or
  resident. This includes, but is not limited to hitting, kicking, . . .
  sexual molestation; (b) emotional abuse which includes, but is not
  limited to, ridiculing or demeaning a patient or resident, making de-
  rogatory remarks to a patient or resident, or cursing directed toward
188                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

  patient or resident, or threatening to inflict physical or emotional
  harm on a patient. Mistreatment shall include the inappropriate use
  of meds, isolation, or physical or chemical restraints on or of a patient
  or resident.

“Neglect” under § 3902 includes (a) lack of attention by a caregiver to
physical needs of an infirm adult including but not limited to toileting,
bathing, meals, and safety; (b) failure by a caregiver to carry out a treat-
ment plan prescribed by a health care professional for an infirm adult; or (c)
intentional and permanent abandonment or desertion in any place of an
infirm adult by a caregiver who does not make reasonable efforts to ensure
that essential services, as defined in this section, will be provided for said
infirm adult.

  INSTITUTIONAL NEGLECT: “Neglect” under § 1131 means (a)
  lack of attention to physical needs of the patient or resident including,
  but not limited to toileting, bathing, meals, and safety; (b) failure to
  report patient or resident health problems or changes in health prob-
  lems or changes in health condition to an immediate supervisor or
  nurse; (c) failure to carry out a prescribed treatment plan for a patient
  or resident; (d) a knowing failure to provide adequate staffing which
  results in a medical emergency to any patient or resident where there
  has been documented history of at least 2 prior cited instances of such
  inadequate staffing within the past 2 years in violation of minimum
  maintenance of staffing levels as required by statute or regulations
  promulgated by the Department, all so as to evidence a willful pattern
  of such neglect.

“Exploitation” under both § 3902 and § 1131: Illegal or improper use or
abuse of an infirm person, the infirm person’s resources or the infirm
person’s rights, by another person, whether for profit or other advantage.

“Infirm adult” under § 3902: Any person 18 years of age or over who,
because of physical or mental disability, is substantially impaired in the
ability to provide adequately for the person’s own care and custody.

“Caregiver” under § 3902 means any adult who has assumed the perma-
nent or temporary care, custody, or responsibility for the supervision of an
infirm adult.
APPENDIX B                                                                 189

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA: D.C. Code § 6-2501 (2001)

“Abuse” means intentional or reckless infliction of serious physical pain or
injury; use or threatened use of violence to force participation in sexual
conduct; repeated intentional imposition of unreasonable confinement, re-
sulting in severe mental distress; repeated use of threats or violence, result-
ing in shock or an intense, expressed fear for one’s life or of serious physical
injury; or intentional or deliberately indifferent deprivation of essential
food, shelter, or health care in violation of a caregiver’s responsibilities,
when that deprivation constitutes a serious threat to one’s life or physical
health.

“Neglect” includes (a) the repeated, careless infliction of serious physical
pain or injury; (b) the repeated failure of a caregiver to take reasonable
steps, within the purview of his or her responsibilities, to protect against
acts of abuse; (c) the repeated, careless imposition of unreasonable confine-
ment, resulting in severe mental distress; or (d) the careless deprivation of
essential food, shelter, or health care in violation of a caregiver’s responsi-
bilities, when that deprivation constitutes a serious threat to one’s life or
physical health.

“Exploitation” means the unlawful appropriation or use of another’s prop-
erty for one’s own benefit or that of a third person.

“Adult in need of protective services” means an individual aged 18 or older
who is: highly vulnerable to abuse, neglect, or exploitation, because of a
physical or mental impairment; being or has recently been abused, ne-
glected, or exploited by another; and likely to continue being abused, ne-
glected, or exploited by others because he or she has no one willing and able
to provide adequate protection.

“Caregiver” means a person that, by law, contract, court order, or volun-
tary action, is charged with or has assumed the responsibility for an adult’s
essential food, shelter, or health care needs.


FLORIDA: Fla. Stat. § 415.102 (2000); Fla. Stat. § 825.102 (2001)

“Abuse” under § 415.102: Willful act or threatened act that causes or is
likely to cause significant impairment to a vulnerable adult’s physical, men-
tal, or emotional health. Abuse includes acts and omissions.
190                                                  ELDER MISTREATMENT

  Defined separately: Sexual abuse defined separately: means acts of a
  sexual nature committed in the presence of a vulnerable adult without
  that person’s informed consent. Sexual abuse includes, but is not
  limited to, the acts defined in § 794.011(1)(h), fondling, exposure of a
  vulnerable adult’s sexual organs, or the use of a vulnerable adult to
  solicit for or engage in prostitution or sexual performance. Sexual
  abuse does not include any act intended for a valid medical purpose or
  any act that may reasonably be construed to be normal caregiving
  action or appropriate display of affection.

“Abuse” under § 825.102: (a) Intentional infliction of physical or psycho-
logical injury upon an elderly person or disabled adult; (b) An intentional
act that could reasonably be expected to result in physical or psychological
injury to an elderly person or disabled adult; or (c) Active encouragement of
any person to commit an act that results or could reasonably be expected to
result in physical or psychological injury to an elderly person or disabled
adult.

“Neglect” under § 415.102 and § 825.102: Failure or omission on the part
of the caregiver to provide the care, supervision, and services necessary to
maintain the physical and mental health of the vulnerable adult, including,
but not limited to, food, clothing, medicine, shelter, supervision, and medi-
cal services, that a prudent person would consider essential for the well-
being of a vulnerable adult. The term “neglect” also means the failure of a
caregiver to make a reasonable effort to protect a vulnerable adult from
abuse, neglect, or exploitation by others. “Neglect” is repeated conduct or
a single incident of carelessness which produces or could reasonably be
expected to result in serious physical or psychological injury or a substan-
tial risk of death.

“Exploitation” under § 415.102 occurs when a person who: 1. Stands in a
position of trust and confidence with a vulnerable adult and knowingly, by
deception or intimidation, obtains or uses, or endeavors to obtain or use, a
vulnerable adult’s funds, assets, or property with the intent to temporarily
or permanently deprive a vulnerable adult of the use, benefit, or possession
of the funds, assets, or property for the benefit of someone other than the
vulnerable adult; or 2. Knows or should know that the vulnerable adult
lacks the capacity to consent, and obtains or uses, or endeavors to obtain or
use, the vulnerable adult’s funds, assets, or property with the intent to
temporarily or permanently deprive the vulnerable adult of the use, benefit,
or possession of the funds, assets, or property for the benefit of someone
other than the vulnerable adult; “Exploitation” may include, but is not
limited to: 1. Breaches of fiduciary relationships, such as the misuse of a
APPENDIX B                                                                191

power of attorney or the abuse of guardianship duties, resulting in the
unauthorized appropriation, sale, or transfer of property; 2. Unauthorized
taking of personal assets; 3. Misappropriation, misuse, or transfer of mon-
eys belonging to a vulnerable adult from a personal or joint account; or 4.
Intentional or negligent failure to effectively use a vulnerable adult’s income
and assets for the necessities required for that person’s support and mainte-
nance.

“Vulnerable adult” under § 415.102 means a person 18 years of age or
older whose ability to perform the normal activities of daily living or to
provide for his or her own care or protection is impaired due to a mental,
emotional, physical, or developmental disability or dysfunctioning, or brain
damage, or the infirmities of aging.

“Caregiver” under § 415.102 means a person who has been entrusted with
or has assumed the responsibility for frequent and regular care of or ser-
vices to a vulnerable adult on a temporary or permanent basis and who has
a commitment, agreement, or understanding with that person or that
person’s guardian that a caregiver role exists. “Caregiver” includes, but is
not limited to, relatives, household members, guardians, neighbors, and
employees and volunteers of facilities as defined in subsection (8). For the
purpose of departmental investigative jurisdiction, the term “caregiver”
does not include law enforcement officers or employees of municipal or
county detention facilities or the Department of Corrections while acting in
an official capacity.


GEORGIA: O.C.G.A. §§ 30-5-3, 31-8-81 (2000)

“Abuse” under § 30-5-3 means willful infliction of physical pain, physical
injury, mental anguish, unreasonable confinement, or the willful depriva-
tion of essential services to a disabled adult or elder person.

  INSTITUTIONAL ABUSE “Abuse” under § 31-8-81 means any in-
  tentional or grossly negligent act or series of acts or intentional or
  grossly negligent omission to act which causes injury to a resident,
  including, but not limited to, assault or battery, failure to provide
  treatment or care, or sexual harassment of the resident.

“Neglect” under § 30-5-3 means absence or omission of essential services
to the degree that it harms or threatens with harm the physical or emotional
health of a disabled adult or elder person.
192                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

“Exploitation” under § 30-5-3 means illegal or improper use of a disabled
adult or elder person or that person’s resources for another’s profit or
advantage.

“Elder person” under § 30-5-3 means a person 65 years of age or older who
is not a resident of a long-term care facility as defined in Article 4 of
Chapter 8 of Title 31.

“Caretaker” under § 30-5-3 means a person who has the responsibility for
the care of a disabled adult or elder person as a result of family relationship,
contract, voluntary assumption of that responsibility, or by operation of
law.


HAWAII: HRS § 346-222 (2000)

“Abuse” means actual or imminent physical injury, psychological abuse or
neglect, sexual abuse, financial exploitation, negligent treatment, or mal-
treatment as further defined in this chapter.

“Neglect” includes the failure to exercise that degree of care toward a
dependent adult which a reasonable person with the responsibility of a
caregiver would exercise, including, but not limited to, failure to: (A) Assist
in personal hygiene; (B) Provide necessary food, shelter, and clothing; (C)
Provide necessary health care, access to health care, or prescribed medica-
tion; (D) Protect a dependent adult from health and safety hazards.

“Financial and economic exploitation” means the wrongful or negligent
taking, withholding, misappropriation, or use of a dependent adult’s money,
real property, or personal property; includes but is not limited to: (A)
Breaches of fiduciary relationships such as the misuse of a power of attor-
ney or the abuse of guardianship privileges, resulting in the unauthorized
appropriation, sale, or transfer of property; (B) The unauthorized taking of
personal assets; (C) The misappropriation, misuse, or transfer of moneys
belonging to the dependent adult from a personal or joint account; or (D)
The intentional or negligent failure to effectively use a dependent adult’s
income and assets for the necessities required for the person’s support and
maintenance. The exploitation may involve coercion, manipulation, threats,
intimidation, misrepresentation, or exertion of undue influence. Protect
against acts of abuse by third parties.

“Dependent adult” means any adult who, because of mental or physical
APPENDIX B                                                               193

impairment is dependent upon another person, a care organization, or a
care facility for personal health, safety, or welfare.


IDAHO: Idaho Code §§ 18-1505, 39-5302 (2000)

“Abuse” under § 39-5302 and § 18-1505 means intentional or negligent
infliction of physical pain, injury, or mental injury.

“Neglect” under § 39-5302 includes self-neglect and means the failure of a
caretaker to provide food, clothing, shelter, or medical care reasonably
necessary to sustain the life and health of a vulnerable adult, or the failure
of a vulnerable adult to provide those services for himself.

“Neglect” under § 18-1505 means failure of a caretaker to provide food,
clothing, shelter, or medical care to a vulnerable adult, in such a manner as
to jeopardize the life, health and safety of the vulnerable adult.

“Exploitation” under § 39-5302 and § 18-1505 means an action which
may include, but is not limited to, the misuse of a vulnerable adult’s funds,
property, or resources by another person for profit or advantage.

“Vulnerable adult” under § 39-5302 and § 18-1505 means a person 18
years of age or older who is unable to protect himself from abuse, neglect
,or exploitation due to physical or mental impairment which affects the
person’s judgment or behavior to the extent that he lacks sufficient under-
standing or capacity to make or communicate or implement decisions re-
garding his person.

“Caretaker” under § 39-5302 and § 18-1505 means any individual or
institution that is responsible by relationship, contract, or court order to
provide food, shelter, or clothing, medical or other life-sustaining necessi-
ties to a vulnerable adult.


ILLINOIS: 320 ILCS 20/2 (2001); 320 ILCS 15/2 (2001); 210 ILCS 30/3
(2001); 210 ILCS 45/1-103 (2001); 720 ILCS 5/12-19 (2001)

“Abuse” under 320 ILCS 20/2 means causing any physical, mental, or
sexual injury to an eligible adult, including exploitation of such adult’s
financial resources.
194                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

“Abuse” under 320 ILCS 15/2 means intentionally or knowingly causing
any physical injury or exploiting the resources of an elderly individual.

  INSTITUTIONAL ABUSE: “Abuse” under 210 ILCS 30/3 means any
  physical injury, sexual abuse, or mental injury inflicted on a resident
  other than by accidental means.

  “Abuse” under 210 ILCS 45/1-103 means any physical or mental
  injury or sexual assault inflicted on a resident other than by accidental
  means in a facility.

  “Abuse” under 720 ILCS 5/12-19 means intentionally or knowingly
  causing any physical or mental injury or committing any sexual of-
  fense set forth in this Code.

“Neglect” under 320 ILCS 20/2 means another individual’s failure to pro-
vide an eligible adult with or willful withholding from an eligible adult the
necessities of life including, but not limited to, food, clothing, shelter, or
medical care. This subsection does not create any new affirmative duty to
provide support to eligible adults. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to
mean that an eligible adult is a victim of neglect because of health care
services provided or not provided by licensed health care professionals.

  INSTITUTIONAL NEGLECT: “Neglect” under 210 ILCS 30/3, 210
  ILCS 45/1-117, and 720 ILCS 5/12-19 means a failure in a long-term
  care facility to provide adequate medical or personal care or mainte-
  nance, which failure results in physical or mental injury to a resident
  or in the deterioration of a resident’s physical or mental condition.

  “Gross Neglect” under 720 ILCS 5/12-19 means recklessly failing to
  provide adequate medical or personal care or maintenance, which
  failure results in physical or mental injury or the deterioration of a
  physical or mental condition.

“Eligible adult” under 320 ILCS 20/2 means a person 60 years of age or
older who resides in a domestic living situation and is, or is alleged to be,
abused, neglected, or financially exploited by another individual.

“Elderly Individual” under 320 ILCS 15/2 means a person 60 years of age
or older.

“Resident” under 210 ILCS 30/3 means a person residing in and receiving
personal care from a long-term care facility, or residing in a mental health
APPENDIX B                                                                195

facility or developmental disability facility as defined in the Mental Health
and Developmental Disabilities Code.

“Caregiver” under 320 ILCS 20/2 means a person who either as a result of
a family relationship, voluntarily, or in exchange for compensation has
assumed responsibility for all or a portion of the care of an eligible adult
who needs assistance with activities of daily living.


INDIANA: Burns Ind. Code Ann. § 12-10-3-2 (2000); Burns Ind. Code
Ann. § 35-46-1-12 (2001)

“Exploitation of endangered adult” under § 35-46-1-12 occurs when a
person who recklessly, knowingly, or intentionally exerts unauthorized use
of personal services or the property of an endangered adult for the person’s
own profit or advantage or for the profit or advantage of another person.

“Endangered adult” under § 12-10-3-2 means an individual who is: (1) at
least 18 years of age; (2) incapable by reason of mental illness, mental
retardation, dementia, habitual drunkenness, excessive use of drugs, or
other physical or mental incapacity of managing or directing the manage-
ment of the individual’s property or providing or directing the provision of
self-care; and (3) harmed or threatened with harm as a result of: (A) neglect;
(B) battery; or (C) exploitation of the individual’s personal services or
property.


IOWA: Iowa Code §§ 235B.2, 726.7, 726.8 (2001)

“Dependent adult abuse” under § 235B.2 means: (1) Any of the following
as a result of the willful or negligent acts or omissions of a caretaker:
(a) Physical injury to, or injury which is at a variance with the history given
of the injury, or unreasonable confinement, unreasonable punishment, or
assault of a dependent adult. (b) The commission of a sexual offense under
chapter 709 or section 726.2 with or against a dependent adult. (c) Exploi-
tation of a dependent adult which means the act or process of taking unfair
advantage of a dependent adult or the adult’s physical or financial re-
sources for one’s own personal or pecuniary profit, without the informed
consent of the dependent adult, including theft, by the use of undue influ-
ence, harassment, duress, deception, false representation, or false pretenses.
(d) The deprivation of the minimum food, shelter, clothing, supervision,
physical or mental health care, or other care necessary to maintain a depen-
dent adult’s life or health. (2) The deprivation of the minimum food, shel-
196                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

ter, clothing, supervision, physical or mental health care, and other care
necessary to maintain a dependent adult’s life or health as a result of the
acts or omissions of the dependent adult. (3) Sexual exploitation of a de-
pendent adult who is a resident of a health care facility, as defined in section
135C.1, by a caretaker providing services to or employed by the health care
facility, whether within the health care facility or at a location outside of
the health care facility.

  Defined separately: Sexual exploitation means any consensual or
  nonconsensual sexual conduct with a dependent adult for the purpose
  of arousing or satisfying the sexual desires of the caretaker or depen-
  dent adult, which includes but is not limited to kissing; touching of
  the clothed or unclothed inner thigh, breast, groin, buttock, anus,
  pubes, or genitals; or a sex act, as defined in section 702.17. Sexual
  exploitation does not include touching which is part of a necessary
  examination, treatment, or care by a caretaker acting within the scope
  of the practice or employment of the caretaker; the exchange of a brief
  touch or hug between the dependent adult and a caretaker for the
  purpose of reassurance, comfort, or casual friendship; or touching
  between spouses.

“Neglect” under § 235B.2 is defined within “abuse” definition.

“Wanton neglect or nonsupport of a dependent adult” under § 726.8 oc-
curs when a caretaker knowingly acts in a manner likely to be injurious to
the physical, mental, or emotional welfare of a dependent adult.

  INSTITUTIONAL NEGLECT: “Wanton neglect of a resident of a
  health care facility” under § 726.7 occurs when a person knowingly
  acts in a manner likely to be injurious to the physical or mental
  welfare of a resident of a health care facility as defined in § 135C.1.

“Exploitation” under § 235B.2 is defined within “abuse” definition.

“Dependent adult” means a person 18 years of age or older who is unable
to protect the person’s own interests or unable to adequately perform or
obtain services necessary to meet essential human needs, as a result of a
physical or mental condition which requires assistance from another, or as
defined by departmental rule.

“Caretaker” means a related or nonrelated person who has the responsibil-
ity for the protection, care, or custody of a dependent adult as a result of
APPENDIX B                                                               197

assuming the responsibility voluntarily, by contract, through employment,
or by order of the court.


KANSAS: K.S.A. §§ 39-1401, 39-1430 (2000)

“Abuse” under § 39-1430 and § 39-1401 means any act or failure to act
performed intentionally or recklessly that causes or is likely to cause harm
to an adult, including: (1) Infliction of physical or mental injury; (2) any
sexual act with an adult when the adult does not consent or when the other
person knows or should know that the adult is incapable of resisting or
declining consent to the sexual act due to mental deficiency or disease or
due to fear of retribution or hardship; (3) unreasonable use of a physical
restraint, isolation, or medication that harms or is likely to harm an adult;
(4) unreasonable use of a physical or chemical restraint, medication, or
isolation as punishment, for convenience, in conflict with a physician’s
orders or as a substitute for treatment, except where such conduct or physi-
cal restraint is in furtherance of the health and safety of the adult; (5) a
threat or menacing conduct directed toward an adult that results or might
reasonably be expected to result in fear or emotional or mental distress to
an adult; (6) fiduciary abuse; or (7) omission or deprivation by a caretaker
or another person of goods or services which are necessary to avoid physi-
cal or mental harm or illness.

“Neglect” under § 39-1430 and § 39-1401 means the failure or omission
by one’s self, caretaker, or another person to provide goods or services
which are reasonably necessary to ensure safety and well-being and to
avoid physical or mental harm or illness.

“Exploitation” under § 39-1430 and § 39-1401 means misappropriation of
an adult’s property or intentionally taking unfair advantage of an adult’s
physical or financial resources for another individual’s personal or financial
advantage by the use of undue influence, coercion, harassment, duress,
deception, false representation or false pretense by a caretaker or another
person. (e) “Fiduciary abuse” means a situation in which any person who
is the caretaker of, or who stands in a position of trust to, an adult, takes,
secretes, or appropriates their money or property, to any use or purpose not
in the due and lawful execution of such person’s trust.

“Adult” under § 39-1430 means an individual 18 years of age or older
alleged to be unable to protect their own interest and who is harmed or
threatened with harm through action or inaction by either another indi-
vidual or through their own action or inaction when (1) such person is
198                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

residing in such person’s own home, the home of a family member or the
home of a friend, (2) such person resides in an adult family home as defined
in K.S.A. § 39-1501 and amendments thereto, or (3) such person is receiv-
ing services through a provider of community services and affiliates thereof
operated or funded by the department of social and rehabilitation services
or the department on aging or a residential facility licensed pursuant to
K.S.A. § 75-3307b and amendments thereto. Such term shall not include
persons to whom K.S.A. § 39-1401 et seq. and amendments thereto apply.

“Resident” under § 39-1401 means (1) Any resident, as defined by K.S.A. §
39-923 and amendments thereto; or (2) any individual kept, cared for,
treated, boarded or otherwise accommodated in a medical care facility; or
(3) any individual, kept, cared for, treated, boarded or otherwise accommo-
dated in a state psychiatric hospital or state institution for the mentally
retarded.

“Caretaker” under § 39-1430 means a person who has assumed the re-
sponsibility for an adult’s care or financial management or both.

“Caretaker” under § 39-1401 means a person or institution who has as-
sumed the responsibility for the care of the resident voluntarily, by contract
or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.


KENTUCKY: KRS §§ 209.020, 508.090 (2001)

“Abuse” under § 209.020 means the infliction of physical pain, mental
injury, or injury of an adult.

“Abuse” under § 508.090 means the infliction of physical pain, injury, or
mental injury, or the deprivation of services by a person which are neces-
sary to maintain the health and welfare of a person, or a situation in which
an adult, living alone, is unable to provide or obtain for himself the services
which are necessary to maintain his health or welfare.

“Neglect” under § 209.020 means a situation in which an adult is unable to
perform or obtain for himself the services which are necessary to maintain
his health or welfare, or the deprivation of services by a caretaker which are
necessary to maintain the health and welfare of an adult, or a situation in
which a person deprives his spouse of reasonable services to maintain health
and welfare.
APPENDIX B                                                                 199

“Exploitation” under § 209.020 means the improper use of an adult or an
adult’s resources by a caretaker or other person for the profit or advantage
of the caretaker or other person.

“Adult” under § 209.020 means: (a) A person 18 years of age or older,
who, because of mental or physical dysfunctioning, is unable to manage his
own resources or carry out the activity of daily living or protect himself
from neglect, or a hazardous or abusive situation without assistance from
others, and who may be in need of protective services; or (b) a person
without regard to age who is the victim of abuse and neglect inflicted by a
spouse.

“Caretaker” under § 209.020 means an individual or institution who has
the responsibility for the care of the adult as a result of family relationship,
or who has assumed the responsibility for the care of the adult person
voluntarily, or by contract, or agreement.


LOUISIANA: La. R.S. §§ 14:403.2, 46:61 (2001)

“Abuse” under La. R.S. § 14:403.2 is the infliction of physical or mental
injury on an adult by other parties, including but not limited to such means
as sexual abuse, abandonment, isolation, exploitation, or extortion of funds
or other things of value, to such an extent that his health, self-determina-
tion, or emotional well-being is endangered.

  Defined separately: Abandonment is the desertion or willful forsak-
  ing of an adult by anyone having care or custody of that person under
  circumstances in which a reasonable person would continue to pro-
  vide care and custody. Isolation includes: (a) Intentional acts commit-
  ted for the purpose of preventing, and which do serve to prevent, an
  adult from having contact with family, friends, or concerned persons.
  This shall not be construed to affect a legal restraining order. (b)
  Intentional acts committed to prevent an adult from receiving his mail
  or telephone calls. (c) Intentional acts of physical or chemical restraint
  of an adult committed for the purpose of preventing contact with
  visitors, family, friends, or other concerned persons. (d) Intentional
  acts which restrict, place, or confine an adult in a restricted area for
  the purposes of social deprivation or preventing contact with family,
  friends, visitors, or other concerned persons. However, medical isola-
  tion prescribed by a licensed physician caring for the adult shall not be
  included in this definition.
200                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT



“Elderly abuse” under § 46:61 means abuse of any person 60 years of age
or older and shall include the abuse of any infirm person residing in a state
licensed facility.

“Neglect” under § 14:403.2 is the failure, by a caregiver responsible for an
adult’s care or by other parties, to provide the proper or necessary support
or medical, surgical, or any other care necessary for his well-being. No
adult who is being provided treatment in accordance with a recognized
religious method of healing in lieu of medical treatment shall for that
reason alone be considered to be neglected or abused.

“Exploitation” under § 14:403.2 is the illegal or improper use or manage-
ment of an aged person’s or disabled adult’s funds, assets, or property, or
the use of an aged person’s or disabled adult’s power of attorney or guard-
ianship for one’s own profit or advantage.

“Adult” under § 14:403.2 is any person 60 years of age or older, any
disabled person 18 years of age or older, or an emancipated minor.

“Caregiver” under § 14:403.2 is any person or persons, either temporarily
or permanently, responsible for the care of an aged person or a physically
or mentally disabled adult. Caregiver includes but is not limited to adult
children, parents, relatives, neighbors, day care personnel, adult foster home
sponsors, personnel of public and private institutions and facilities, adult
congregate living facilities, and nursing homes which have voluntarily as-
sumed the care of an aged person, or disabled adult, have assumed volun-
tary residence with an aged person or disabled adult, or have assumed
voluntary use or tutelage of an aged or disabled person’s assets, funds, or
property, and specifically shall include city, parish, or state law enforce-
ment agencies.


MAINE: 22 M.R.S. § 3472 (2000)

“Abuse” means the infliction of injury, unreasonable confinement, intimi-
dation, or cruel punishment with resulting physical harm or pain or mental
anguish; sexual abuse or exploitation; or the willful deprivation of essential
needs.

  Defined separately: Sexual abuse or exploitation means contact or
  interaction of a sexual nature involving an incapacitated or dependent
  adult without that adult’s consent.
APPENDIX B                                                              201

“Neglect” means a threat to an adult’s health or welfare by physical or
mental injury or impairment, deprivation of essential needs or lack of pro-
tection from these.

“Exploitation” means the illegal or improper use of an incapacitated or
dependent adult or his resources for another’s profit or advantage.

“Dependent adult” means any adult who is wholly or partially dependent
upon one or more other persons for care or support, either emotional or
physical, and who would be in danger if that care or support were with-
drawn.

“Caretaker” means any individual or institution who has or assumes the
responsibility for the care of an adult.


MARYLAND: Md. Family Law Code Ann. § 14-101 (2001); Md. Ann.
Code Art. 27, § 35D (2001); Md. Health General Code Ann. § 19-347
(2001)

“Abuse” under § 14-101 means the sustaining of any physical injury by a
vulnerable adult as a result of cruel or inhumane treatment or as a result of
a malicious act by any person.

“Abuse” under Art. 27, § 35D means (i) the sustaining of any physical pain
or injury by a vulnerable adult as a result of cruel or inhumane treatment or
as a result of a malicious act by a caregiver, a parent, or other person who
has permanent or temporary care or custody or responsibility for the super-
vision of a vulnerable adult, or by any household or family member under
circumstances that indicate that the vulnerable adult’s health or welfare is
harmed or threatened. (ii) Abuse” includes the sexual abuse of a vulnerable
adult. (iii) “Abuse” does not include the performance of an accepted medi-
cal or behavioral procedure ordered by a health care provider acting within
the scope of the health care provider’s practice.

  INSTITUTIONAL ABUSE: “Abuse” under § 19-347 means the
  nontherapeutic infliction of physical pain or injury, or any persistent
  course of conduct intended to produce or resulting in mental or emo-
  tional distress; “Abuse” does not include the performance of an
  accepted medical procedure that a physician orders.
202                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

“Neglect” under § 14-101 means the willful deprivation of a vulnerable
adult of adequate food, clothing, essential medical treatment or rehabilita-
tive therapy, shelter, or supervision.

“Neglect” under Art. 27, § 35D means intentional failure to provide neces-
sary assistance and resources for the physical needs of the vulnerable adult,
including food, clothing, toileting, essential medical treatment, shelter, or
supervision.

“Exploitation” under § 14-101 means any action which involves the misuse
of a vulnerable adult’s funds, property, or person.

“Vulnerable adult” under § 14-101 and Art. 27, § 35D means an adult who
lacks the physical or mental capacity to provide for the adult’s daily needs.

“Caregiver” under Art. 27, § 35D means a person under a duty to care for
a vulnerable adult because of a contractual undertaking to provide care.


MASSACHUSETTS: Mass. Ann. Laws Ch. 19A § 14 (2001); Mass. Ann.
Laws Ch. 111 § 72F (2001)

“Abuse” under Ch. 19A § 14 means an act or omission which results in
serious physical or emotional injury to an elderly person or financial exploi-
tation of an elderly person; provided, however, that no person shall be
considered to be abused or neglected for the sole reason that such person is
being furnished or relies upon treatment in accordance with the tenets and
teachings of a church or religious denomination by a duly accredited prac-
titioner thereof.

  INSTITUTIONAL ABUSE: “Abuse” under Ch. 111 § 72F means the
  willful infliction of injury, unreasonable confinement, intimidation,
  including verbal or mental abuse, or punishment with resulting physi-
  cal harm, pain, or mental anguish or assault and battery; provided,
  however, that verbal or mental abuse shall require a knowing and
  willful act directed at a specific person.

  INSTITUTIONAL NEGLECT: “Neglect” under Ch. 111 § 72F
  means failure to provide goods and services necessary to avoid physi-
  cal harm, mental anguish, or mental illness.

“Financial exploitation” under Ch. 19A § 14 means an act or omission by
another person, which causes a substantial monetary or property loss to an
APPENDIX B                                                                 203

elderly person, or causes a substantial monetary or property gain to the
other person, which gain would otherwise benefit the elderly person but for
the act or omission of such other person; provided, however, that such an
act or omission shall not be construed as financial exploitation if the elderly
person has knowingly consented to such act or omission unless such con-
sent is a consequence of misrepresentation, undue influence, coercion or
threat of force by such other person; and, provided further, that financial
exploitation shall not be construed to interfere with or prohibit a bona fide
gift by an elderly person or to apply to any act or practice in the conduct of
any trade or commerce declared unlawful by section two of chapter ninety-
three A.

“Elderly person” under Ch. 19A § 14 means an individual who is 60 years
of age or over.

“Resident” under Ch. 111 § 72F means an individual who resides in a long-
term care facility licensed under section 71.

“Caretaker” under Ch. 19A § 14 means the person responsible for the care
of an elderly person, which responsibility may arise as the result of a family
relationship, or by a voluntary or contractual duty undertaken on behalf of
an elderly person, or may arise by a fiduciary duty imposed by law.


MICHIGAN: MCLS §§ 400.11, 400.586k, 750.145n (2001)

“Abuse” under § 400.11 means harm or threatened harm to an adult’s
health or welfare caused by another person. Abuse includes, but is not
limited to, nonaccidental physical or mental injury, sexual abuse, or mal-
treatment.

“Abuse of older persons” under § 400.586k includes the following types of
abuse involving an older person: physical abuse, emotional or social abuse,
financial abuse, or environmental abuse.

“Vulnerable adult abuse” under MCLS § 750.145n: (1) A caregiver is
guilty of vulnerable adult abuse in the first degree if the caregiver intention-
ally causes serious physical harm or serious mental harm to a vulnerable
adult. (2) A caregiver or other person with authority over the vulnerable
adult is guilty of vulnerable adult abuse in the second degree if the reckless
act or reckless failure to act of the caregiver or other person with authority
over the vulnerable adult causes serious physical harm or serious mental
harm to a vulnerable adult. (3) A caregiver is guilty of vulnerable adult
204                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

abuse in the third degree if the caregiver intentionally causes physical harm
to a vulnerable adult. (4) A caregiver or other person with authority over
the vulnerable adult is guilty of vulnerable adult abuse in the fourth degree
if the reckless act or reckless failure to act of the caregiver or other person
with authority over a vulnerable adult causes physical harm to a vulnerable
adult.

“Neglect” under § 400.11 means harm to an adult’s health or welfare
caused by the inability of the adult to respond to a harmful situation or by
the conduct of a person who assumes responsibility for a significant aspect
of the adult’s health or welfare. Neglect includes the failure to provide
adequate food, clothing, shelter, or medical care. A person shall not be
considered to be abused, neglected, or in need of emergency or protective
services for the sole reason that the person is receiving or relying upon
treatment by spiritual means through prayer alone in accordance with the
tenets and practices of a recognized church or religious denomination, and
this act shall not require any medical care or treatment in contravention of
the stated or implied objection of that person.

“Exploitation” under § 400.11 means an action that involves the misuse of
an adult’s funds, property, or personal dignity by another person.

“Adult in need of protective services” or “adult” under § 400.11 means a
vulnerable person not less than 18 years of age who is suspected of being or
believed to be abused, neglected, or exploited. “Vulnerable” means a
condition in which an adult is unable to protect himself or herself from
abuse, neglect, or exploitation because of a mental or physical impairment
or because of advanced age.

“Vulnerable adult” under § 750.145 means 1 or more of the following: (i)
An individual age 18 or over who, because of age, developmental disability,
mental illness, or physical disability requires supervision or personal care or
lacks the personal and social skills required to live independently. (ii) An
adult as defined in section 3(1)(b) of the adult foster care facility licensing
act, MCL 400.703. (iii) An adult as defined in section 11(b) of the social
welfare act, MCL 400.11.

“Caregiver” under § 750.145 means an individual who directly cares for or
has physical custody of a vulnerable adult.
APPENDIX B                                                                  205

MINNESOTA: Minn. Stat. § 626.5572 (2000)

“Abuse” means: (a) An act against a vulnerable adult that constitutes a
violation of, an attempt to violate, or aiding and abetting a violation of: (1)
assault in the first through fifth degrees as defined in sections 609.221 to
609.224; (2) the use of drugs to injure or facilitate crime as defined in
section 609.235; (3) the solicitation, inducement, and promotion of prosti-
tution as defined in section 609.322; and (4) criminal sexual conduct in the
first through fifth degrees as defined in sections 609.342 to 609.3451. A
violation includes any action that meets the elements of the crime, regard-
less of whether there is a criminal proceeding or conviction. (b) Conduct
which is not an accident or therapeutic conduct as defined in this section,
which produces or could reasonably be expected to produce physical pain
or injury or emotional distress including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) hitting, slapping, kicking, pinching, biting, or corporal punishment of a
vulnerable adult; (2) use of repeated or malicious oral, written, or gestured
language toward a vulnerable adult or the treatment of a vulnerable adult
which would be considered by a reasonable person to be disparaging, de-
rogatory, humiliating, harassing, or threatening; (3) use of any aversive or
deprivation procedure, unreasonable confinement, or involuntary seclu-
sion, including the forced separation of the vulnerable adult from other
persons against the will of the vulnerable adult or the legal representative of
the vulnerable adult; and (4) use of any aversive or deprivation procedures
for persons with developmental disabilities or related conditions not autho-
rized under section 245.825. (c) Any sexual contact or penetration as de-
fined in section 609.341, between a facility staff person or a person provid-
ing services in the facility and a resident, patient, or client of that facility.
(d) The act of forcing, compelling, coercing, or enticing a vulnerable adult
against the vulnerable adult’s will to perform services for the advantage of
another. (e) For purposes of this section, a vulnerable adult is not abused
for the sole reason that the vulnerable adult or a person with authority to
make health care decisions for the vulnerable adult under sections 144.651,
144A.44, chapter 145B, 145C or 252A, or section 253B.03 or 525.539 to
525.6199, refuses consent or withdraws consent, consistent with that au-
thority and within the boundary of reasonable medical practice, to any
therapeutic conduct, including any care, service, or procedure to diagnose,
maintain, or treat the physical or mental condition of the vulnerable adult
or, where permitted under law, to provide nutrition and hydration parenter-
ally or through intubation. This paragraph does not enlarge or diminish
rights otherwise held under law by: (1) a vulnerable adult or a person acting
on behalf of a vulnerable adult, including an involved family member, to
consent to or refuse consent for therapeutic conduct; or (2) a caregiver to
offer or provide or refuse to offer or provide therapeutic conduct. (f) For
206                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

purposes of this section, a vulnerable adult is not abused for the sole reason
that the vulnerable adult, a person with authority to make health care
decisions for the vulnerable adult, or a caregiver in good faith selects and
depends upon spiritual means or prayer for treatment or care of disease or
remedial care of the vulnerable adult in lieu of medical care, provided that
this is consistent with the prior practice or belief of the vulnerable adult or
with the expressed intentions of the vulnerable adult. (g) For purposes of
this section, a vulnerable adult is not abused for the sole reason that the
vulnerable adult, who is not impaired in judgment or capacity by mental or
emotional dysfunction or undue influence, engages in consensual sexual
contact with: (1) a person, including a facility staff person, when a consen-
sual sexual personal relationship existed prior to the caregiving relation-
ship; or (2) a personal care attendant, regardless of whether the consensual
sexual personal relationship existed prior to the caregiving relationship.

“Neglect” means (a) The failure or omission by a caregiver to supply a
vulnerable adult with care or services, including but not limited to, food,
clothing, shelter, health care, or supervision which is: (1) reasonable and
necessary to obtain or maintain the vulnerable adult’s physical or mental
health or safety, considering the physical and mental capacity or dysfunc-
tion of the vulnerable adult; and (2) which is not the result of an accident or
therapeutic conduct. (b) The absence or likelihood of absence of care or
services, including but not limited to, food, clothing, shelter, health care, or
supervision necessary to maintain the physical and mental health of the
vulnerable adult which a reasonable person would deem essential to obtain
or maintain the vulnerable adult’s health, safety, or comfort considering the
physical or mental capacity or dysfunction of the vulnerable adult.

“Financial exploitation” means: (a) In breach of a fiduciary obligation
recognized elsewhere in law, including pertinent regulations, contractual
obligations, documented consent by a competent person, or the obligations
of a responsible party under section 144.6501, a person: (1) engages in
unauthorized expenditure of funds entrusted to the actor by the vulnerable
adult which results or is likely to result in detriment to the vulnerable adult;
or (2) fails to use the financial resources of the vulnerable adult to provide
food, clothing, shelter, health care, therapeutic conduct or supervision for
the vulnerable adult, and the failure results or is likely to result in detriment
to the vulnerable adult. (b) In the absence of legal authority a person: (1)
willfully uses, withholds, or disposes of funds or property of a vulnerable
adult; (2) obtains for the actor or another the performance of services by a
third person for the wrongful profit or advantage of the actor or another to
the detriment of the vulnerable adult; (3) acquires possession or control of,
or an interest in, funds or property of a vulnerable adult through the use of
APPENDIX B                                                                 207

undue influence, harassment, duress, deception, or fraud; or (4) forces,
compels, coerces, or entices a vulnerable adult against the vulnerable adult’s
will to perform services for the profit or advantage of another. (c) Nothing
in this definition requires a facility or caregiver to provide financial man-
agement or supervise financial management for a vulnerable adult except as
otherwise required by law.

“Vulnerable adult” means any person 18 years of age or older who: (1) is a
resident or inpatient of a facility; (2) receives services at or from a facility
required to be licensed to serve adults under sections 245A.01 to 245A.15,
except that a person receiving outpatient services for treatment of chemical
dependency or mental illness, or one who is committed as a sexual psycho-
pathic personality or as a sexually dangerous person under chapter 253B, is
not considered a vulnerable adult unless the person meets the requirements
of clause (4); (3) receives services from a home care provider required to be
licensed under section 144A.46; or from a person or organization that
exclusively offers, provides, or arranges for personal care assistant services
under the medical assistance program as authorized under sections 256B.04,
subdivision 16, 256B.0625, subdivision 19a, and 256B.0627; or (4) regard-
less of residence or whether any type of service is received, possesses a
physical or mental infirmity or other physical, mental, or emotional dys-
function: (i) that impairs the individual’s ability to provide adequately for
the individual’s own care without assistance, including the provision of
food, shelter, clothing, health care, or supervision; and (ii) because of the
dysfunction or infirmity and the need for assistance, the individual has an
impaired ability to protect the individual from maltreatment.

“Caregiver” means an individual or facility who has responsibility for the
care of a vulnerable adult as a result of a family relationship, or who has
assumed responsibility for all or a portion of the care of a vulnerable adult
voluntarily, by contract, or by agreement.


MISSISSIPPI: Miss. Code Ann. § 43-47-5 (2001)

“Abuse” shall mean the willful or nonaccidental infliction of physical pain,
injury, or mental anguish on a vulnerable adult, the unreasonable confine-
ment of a vulnerable adult, or the willful deprivation by a caretaker of
services which are necessary to maintain the mental and physical health of
a vulnerable adult. “Abuse” shall include sexual abuse. “Abuse” shall not
mean conduct which is a part of the treatment and care of, and in further-
ance of the health and safety of a patient or resident of a care facility.
“Abuse” includes, but is not limited to, a single incident.
208                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

“Neglect” shall mean either the inability of a vulnerable adult who is living
alone to provide for himself the food, clothing, shelter, health care or other
services which are necessary to maintain his mental and physical health, or
failure of a caretaker to supply the vulnerable adult with the food, clothing,
shelter, health care, supervision or other services which a reasonably pru-
dent person would do to maintain the vulnerable adult’s mental and physi-
cal health. “Neglect” includes, but is not limited to, a single incident.

“Exploitation” shall mean the illegal or improper use of a vulnerable adult
or his resources for another’s profit or advantage with or without the
consent of the vulnerable adult. “Exploitation” includes, but is not limited
to, a single incident.

“Vulnerable adult” shall mean a person 18 years of age or older or any
minor whose ability to perform the normal activities of daily living or to
provide for his or her own care or protection is impaired due to a mental,
emotional, physical, or developmental disability or dysfunction, or brain
damage or the infirmities of aging. The term “vulnerable adult” shall also
include all residents or patients, regardless of age, in a care facility for the
purposes of Sections 43-47-19 and 43-47-37 only. The department shall
not be prohibited from investigating, and shall have the authority and
responsibility to fully investigate, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, any allegation of abuse, neglect, and/or exploitation regarding a
patient in a care facility, if the alleged abuse, neglect, and/or exploitation
occurred at a private residence.

“Caretaker” shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, or other
organization which has assumed the responsibility for the care of a vulner-
able adult, but shall not include the Division of Medicaid, a licensed hospi-
tal, or a licensed nursing home within the state.


MISSOURI: § 660.250 R.S. Mo. (2000); § 565.180 R.S. Mo. (2000); §
565.182 R.S. Mo. (2000); § 565.184 R.S. Mo. (2000); § 198.006 R.S.Mo.
(2000)

“Abuse” under § 660.250 means the infliction of physical, sexual, or emo-
tional injury or harm including financial exploitation by any person, firm,
or corporation.

“Elder abuse” under § 565.180 occurs when a person attempts to kill,
knowingly causes or attempts to cause serious physical injury, as defined in
§ 565.002, to any person 60 years of age or older or an eligible adult as
APPENDIX B                                                                 209

defined in § 660.250. It occurs under § 565.182 when a person (1) Know-
ingly causes, attempts to cause physical injury to any person 60 years of age
or older or an eligible adult, as defined in § 660.250 by means of a deadly
weapon or dangerous instrument; or (2) Recklessly and purposely causes
serious physical injury, as defined in § 565.002, to a person 60 years of age
or older or an eligible adult as defined in § 660.250. It occurs under §
565.184 when a person (1) Knowingly causes or attempts to cause physical
contact with any person 60 years of age or older or an eligible adult as
defined in § 660.250, knowing the other person will regard the contact as
harmful or provocative; or (2) Purposely engages in conduct involving more
than one incident that causes grave emotional distress to a person 60 years
of age or older or an eligible adult, as defined in § 660.250. The course of
conduct shall be such as would cause a reasonable person age 60 years of
age or older or an eligible adult, as defined in § 660.250, to suffer substan-
tial emotional distress; or (3) Purposely or knowingly places a person 60
years of age or older or an eligible adult, as defined in § 660.250 in appre-
hension of immediate physical injury; or (4) Intentionally fails to provide
care, goods or services to a person 60 years of age or older or an eligible
adult, as defined in § 660.250. The cause of the conduct shall be such as
would cause a reasonable person age 60 or older or an eligible adult, as
defined in § 660.250, to suffer physical or emotional distress; or (5) Know-
ingly acts or knowingly fails to act in a manner which results in a grave risk
to the life, body, or health of a person 60 years of age or older or an eligible
adult, as defined in § 660.250.

  INSTITUTIONAL ABUSE: “Abuse” under § 198.006 means the
  infliction of physical, sexual, or emotional injury or harm.

“Neglect” under § 660.250 means the failure to provide services to an
eligible adult by any person, firm or corporation with a legal or contractual
duty to do so, when such failure presents either an imminent danger to the
health, safety, or welfare of the client or a substantial probability that death
or serious physical harm would result.

  INSTITUTIONAL NEGLECT: “Neglect” under § 198.006 means
  the failure to provide, by those responsible for the care, custody, and
  control of a resident in a facility, the services which are reasonable
  and necessary to maintain the physical and mental health of the resi-
  dent, when such failure presents either an imminent danger to the
  health, safety, or welfare of the resident or a substantial probability
  that death or serious physical harm would result.
210                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

“Eligible adult” under § 660.250 means a person 60 years of age or older
or an adult with a handicap, as defined in § 660.053, between the ages of
18 and 59 who is unable to protect his own interests or adequately perform
or obtain services which are necessary to meet his essential human needs.

“Resident” under § 198.006 means a person who by reason of aging,
illness, disease, or physical or mental infirmity receives or requires care and
services furnished by a facility and who resides or boards in or otherwise
kept, cared for, treated or accommodated in such facility for a period
exceeding 24 consecutive hours.


MONTANA: Mont. Code Anno. § 52-3-803 (2001)

“Abuse” means: (a) the infliction of physical or mental injury; or (b) the
deprivation of food, shelter, clothing, or services necessary to maintain the
physical or mental health of an older person or a person with a develop-
mental disability without lawful authority. A declaration made pursuant to
50-9-103 constitutes lawful authority.

  Defined separately: Sexual abuse means the commission of sexual
  assault, sexual intercourse without consent, indecent exposure, devi-
  ate sexual conduct, or incest.

“Neglect” means the failure of a person who has assumed legal responsibil-
ity or a contractual obligation for caring for an older person or a person
with a developmental disability or who has voluntarily assumed responsi-
bility for the person’s care, including an employee of a public or private
residential institution, facility, home, or agency, to provide food, shelter,
clothing, or services necessary to maintain the physical or mental health of
the older person or the person with a developmental disability.

“Exploitation” means: (a) the unreasonable use of an older person or a
person with a developmental disability or of a power of attorney, conserva-
torship, or guardianship with regard to an older person or a person with a
developmental disability to obtain control of or to divert to the advantage
of another the ownership, use, benefit, or possession of the person’s money,
assets, or property by means of deception, duress, menace, fraud, undue
influence, or intimidation with the intent or result of permanently depriving
the older person or person with a developmental disability of the owner-
ship, use, benefit, or possession of the person’s money, assets, or property;
(b) an act taken by a person who has the trust and confidence of an older
person or a person with a developmental disability to obtain control of or
APPENDIX B                                                               211

to divert to the advantage of another the ownership, use, benefit, or posses-
sion of the person’s money, assets, or property by means of deception,
duress, menace, fraud, undue influence, or intimidation with the intent or
result of permanently depriving the older person or person with a develop-
mental disability of the ownership, use, or benefit of the person’s money,
assets, or property.

“Older person” means a person who is at least 60 years of age. For pur-
poses of prosecution under 52-3-825(2), the person 60 years of age or older
must be unable to provide personal protection from abuse, sexual abuse,
neglect, or exploitation because of a mental or physical impairment or
because of frailties or dependencies brought about by advanced age. “Per-
son with a developmental disability” means a person 18 years of age or
older who has a developmental disability.


NEBRASKA: R.R.S. Neb. §§ 28-351, 28-353, 28-355, 28-358, 28-371
(2001)

“Abuse” means any knowing, intentional, or negligent act or omission on
the part of a caregiver, a vulnerable adult, or any other person which results
in physical injury, unreasonable confinement, cruel punishment, sexual
abuse, exploitation, or denial of essential services to a vulnerable adult.

“Denial of essential services” under § 28-355 shall mean that essential
services are denied or neglected to such an extent that there is actual physi-
cal injury to a vulnerable adult or imminent danger of the vulnerable adult
suffering physical injury or death.

“Exploitation” under § 28-358 shall mean the taking of property of a
vulnerable adult by means of undue influence, breach of a fiduciary rela-
tionship, deception, or extortion or by any unlawful means.

“Vulnerable adult” under § 28-371 shall mean any person 18 years of age
or older who has a substantial mental or functional impairment or for
whom a guardian has been appointed under the Nebraska Probate Code.

“Caregiver” under § 28-353 shall mean any person or entity which has
assumed the responsibility for the care of a vulnerable adult voluntarily, by
express or implied contract, or by order of a court of competent jurisdic-
tion.
212                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

NEVADA: Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§ 41.1395, 200.5092 (2001)

“Abuse” under § 41.1395 means willful and unjustified: (1) Infliction of
pain, injury or mental anguish; or (2) Deprivation of food, shelter, clothing
or services which are necessary to maintain the physical or mental health of
an older person or a vulnerable person.

“Abuse” under § 200.5092 means willful and unjustified: (a) Infliction of
pain, injury or mental anguish on an older person; or (b) Deprivation of
food, shelter, clothing, or services which are necessary to maintain the
physical or mental health of an older person.

“Neglect” under § 41.1395 means the failure of a person who has assumed
legal responsibility or a contractual obligation for caring for an older per-
son or a vulnerable person, or who has voluntarily assumed responsibility
for his care, to provide food, shelter, clothing, or services within the scope
of his responsibility or obligation, which are necessary to maintain the
physical or mental health of the older person or vulnerable person. For the
purposes of this paragraph, a person voluntarily assumes responsibility to
provide care for an older or vulnerable person only to the extent that he has
expressly acknowledged his responsibility to provide such care.

“Neglect” under § 200.5092 means the failure of: (a) A person who has
assumed legal responsibility or a contractual obligation for caring for an
older person or who has voluntarily assumed responsibility for his care to
provide food, shelter, clothing, or services which are necessary to maintain
the physical or mental health of the older person; or (b) An older person to
provide for his own needs because of inability to do so.

“Exploitation” under § 41.1395 and § 200.5092 means any act taken by a
person who has the trust and confidence of an older person or a vulnerable
person or any use of the power of attorney or guardianship of an older
person or a vulnerable person to obtain control, through deception, intimi-
dation, or undue influence, over the money, assets or property of the older
person or vulnerable person with the intention of permanently depriving
the older person or vulnerable person of the ownership, use, benefit, or
possession of his money, assets, or property. As used in this paragraph,
“undue influence” does not include the normal influence that one member
of a family has over another.

“Older person” under § 41.1395 and § 200.5092 means a person who is 60
years of age or older. ”Vulnerable person” means a person who: (1) Has a
physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the
APPENDIX B                                                              213

major life activities of the person; and (2) Has a medical or psychological
record of the impairment or is otherwise regarded as having the impair-
ment.


NEW HAMPSHIRE: RSA 161-F:43 (2000)

“Abuse” means any act or omission by a person which is not accidental and
harms or threatens to harm an incapacitated adult’s physical, mental, or
emotional health or safety. The term abuse includes the following:
 (a) “Emotional abuse” means the misuse of power, authority, or both,
verbal harassment, or unreasonable confinement which results or could
result in the mental anguish or emotional distress of an incapacitated adult.
 (b) “Physical abuse” means the use of physical force which results or could
result in physical injury to an incapacitated adult. (c) “Sexual abuse” means
contact or interaction of a sexual nature involving an incapacitated adult
who is being used without his or her informed consent.

“Neglect” means an act of omission which results or could result in the
deprivation of essential services necessary to maintain the minimum men-
tal, emotional, or physical health and safety of an incapacitated adult.
“Self-neglect” is defined separately at §161-F:43(VII).

“Exploitation” means the illegal use of an incapacitated adult’s person or
property for another person’s profit or advantage, or the breach of a fidu-
ciary relationship through the use of a person or a person’s property for any
purpose not in the proper and lawful execution of a trust, including, but not
limited to, situations where a person obtains money, property, or services
from an incapacitated adult through the use of undue influence, harass-
ment, duress, deception, or fraud.

“Adult” means any person who is 18 years of age or older who is thought
to manifest a degree of incapacity by reason of limited mental or physical
function which may result in harm or hazard to himself or others or who is
a person unable to manage his estate.


NEW JERSEY: N.J. Stat. §§ 52:27D-407, 30:1A-3 (2001)

“Abuse” under § 52:27D-407 means the willful infliction of physical pain,
injury, or mental anguish, unreasonable confinement, or the willful depri-
vation of services which are necessary to maintain a person’s physical and
mental health.
214                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

  INSTITUTIONAL ABUSE: “Abuse” under § 30:1A-3 means the
  willful infliction of physical pain, injury, or mental anguish; unrea-
  sonable confinement; or, the willful deprivation of services which are
  necessary to maintain a person’s physical and mental health.

“Neglect” under § 52:27D-407 means an act or failure to act by a vulner-
able adult or his caretaker which results in the inadequate provision of care
or services necessary to maintain the physical and mental health of the
vulnerable adult, and which places the vulnerable adult in a situation which
can result in serious injury or which is life-threatening.

“Exploitation” under § 52:27D-407 means the act or process of illegally or
improperly using a person or his resources for another person’s profit or
advantage.

  INSTITUTIONAL EXPLOITATION: “Exploitation” under § 30:1A-
  3 means the act or process of using a person or his resources for
  another person’s profit or advantage.

“Vulnerable adult” under § 52:27D-407 means a person 18 years of age or
older who resides in a community setting and who, because of a physical or
mental illness, disability, or deficiency, lacks sufficient understanding or
capacity to make, communicate, or carry out decisions concerning his well-
being and is the subject of abuse, neglect ,or exploitation. A person shall
not be deemed to be the subject of abuse, neglect, or exploitation or in need
of protective services for the sole reason that the person is being furnished
nonmedical remedial treatment by spiritual means through prayer alone or
in accordance with a recognized religious method of healing in lieu of
medical treatment, and in accordance with the tenets and practices of the
person’s established religious tradition.

“Caretaker” under § 52:27D-407 means a person who has assumed the
responsibility for the care of a vulnerable adult as a result of family rela-
tionship or who has assumed responsibility for the care of a vulnerable
adult voluntarily, by contract, or by order of a court of competent jurisdic-
tion, whether or not they reside together.


NEW MEXICO: N.M. Stat. Ann. §§ 27-7-16, 30-47-3 (2001)

“Abuse” under § 27-7-16 means: (1) knowingly, intentionally or negli-
gently and without justifiable cause inflicting physical pain, injury, or men-
tal anguish; or (2) the intentional deprivation by a caretaker or other per-
APPENDIX B                                                                215

son of services necessary to maintain the mental and physical health of an
adult;

  INSTITUTIONAL ABUSE: “Abuse” under § 30-47-3 means any act
  or failure to act performed intentionally, knowingly or recklessly that
  causes or is likely to cause harm to a resident, including: (1) physical
  contact that harms or is likely to harm a resident of a care facility;
  (2) inappropriate use of a physical restraint, isolation, or medication
  that harms or is likely to harm a resident; (3) inappropriate use of a
  physical or chemical restraint, medication, or isolation as punishment
  or in conflict with a physician’s order; (4) medically inappropriate
  conduct that causes or is likely to cause physical harm to a resident;
  (5) medically inappropriate conduct that causes or is likely to cause
  great psychological harm to a resident;(6) an unlawful act, a threat, or
  menacing conduct directed toward a resident that results and might
  reasonably be expected to result in fear or emotional or mental dis-
  tress to a resident.

“Neglect” under § 27-7-16 means failure of the caretaker of an adult to
provide basic needs such as clothing, food, shelter, supervision, and care for
the physical and mental health for that adult or failure by an adult to
provide such basic needs for himself.

  INSTITUTIONAL NEGLECT: “Neglect” under § 30-47-3 means,
  subject to the resident’s right to refuse treatment and subject to the
  caregiver’s right to exercise sound medical discretion, the grossly neg-
  ligent: (1) failure to provide any treatment, service, care, medication,
  or item that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of a resident;
  (2) failure to take any reasonable precaution that is necessary to pre-
  vent damage to the health or safety of a resident; or (3) failure to carry
  out a duty to supervise properly or control the provision of any treat-
  ment, care, good, service, or medication necessary to maintain the
  health or safety of a resident.

“Exploitation” under § 27-7-16 means an unjust or improper use of an
adult’s money or property for another person’s profit or advantage, pecuni-
ary or otherwise.

“Adult” under § 27-7-16 means a person 18 years of age or older.

“Caretaker” under § 27-7-16 means an individual or institution that has
assumed the responsibility for the care of an adult.
216                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

NEW YORK: NY CLS Soc. Serv. § 473 (2001); NY CLS Penal §§ 260.30,
260.32, 260.34 (2001)

“Physical abuse” means the nonaccidental use of force that results in bodily
injury, pain or impairment, including but not limited to, being slapped,
burned, cut, bruised, or improperly physically restrained. (b) ”Sexual abuse”
means nonconsensual sexual contact of any kind, including but not limited
to, forcing sexual contact or forcing sex with a third party. (c) ”Emotional
abuse” means willful infliction of mental or emotional anguish by threat,
humiliation, intimidation, or other abusive conduct, including but not lim-
ited to, frightening or isolating an adult.

“Endangering the welfare of a vulnerable elderly person” occurs under NY
CLS Penal § 260.32 when, being a caregiver for a vulnerable elderly person:
1. With intent to cause physical injury to such person, he or she causes such
injury to such person; or 2. He or she recklessly causes physical injury to
such person; or 3. With criminal negligence, he or she causes physical injury
to such person by means of a deadly weapon or a dangerous instrument; or
4. He or she subjects such person to sexual contact without the latter’s
consent. “Endangering the welfare of a vulnerable elderly person” under
NY CLS Penal § 260.34 occurs when, being a caregiver for a vulnerable
elderly person: 1. With intent to cause physical injury to such person, he or
she causes serious physical injury to such person; or 2. He or she recklessly
causes serious physical injury to such person.

“Active neglect” under NY CLS Soc. Serv. § 473 means willful failure by
the caregiver to fulfill the care-taking functions and responsibilities as-
sumed by the caregiver, including but not limited to, abandonment, willful
deprivation of food, water, heat, clean clothing and bedding, eyeglasses or
dentures, or health-related services. “Passive neglect” under NY CLS Soc.
Serv. § 473 means nonwillful failure of a caregiver to fulfill care-taking
functions and responsibilities assumed by the caregiver, including but not
limited to, abandonment or denial of food or health-related services be-
cause of inadequate caregiver knowledge, infirmity, or disputing the value
of prescribed services. “Self-neglect” defined separately.

“Financial exploitation” means improper use of an adult’s funds, property,
or resources by another individual, including but not limited to, fraud, false
pretenses, embezzlement, conspiracy, forgery, falsifying records, coerced
property transfers, or denial of access to assets.

“Vulnerable elderly person” under NY CLS Penal § 260.30 means a person
60 years of age or older who is suffering from a disease or infirmity associ-
APPENDIX B                                                                 217

ated with advanced age and manifested by demonstrable physical, mental,
or emotional dysfunction to the extent that the person is incapable of
adequately providing for his or her own health or personal care.

“Caregiver” under NY CLS § 260.30 means a person who (i) assumes
responsibility for the care of a vulnerable elderly person pursuant to a court
order; or (ii) receives monetary or other valuable consideration for provid-
ing care for a vulnerable elderly person.


NORTH CAROLINA: N.C. Gen. Stat. §§ 14-32.3, 108A-101, 131D-2
(2000)

“Abuse” under § 108A-101 means the willful infliction of physical pain,
injury ,or mental anguish, unreasonable confinement, or the willful depri-
vation by a caretaker of services which are necessary to maintain mental
and physical health.

“Abuse” under § 14-32.3 occurs when a person is a caretaker of a disabled
or elder adult who is residing in a domestic setting and, with malice afore-
thought, knowingly and willfully: (i) assaults, (ii) fails to provide medical or
hygienic care, or (iii) confines or restrains the disabled or elder adult in a
place or under a condition that is cruel or unsafe, and as a result of the act
or failure to act the disabled or elder adult suffers mental or physical injury.

  INSTITUTIONAL ABUSE: “Abuse” under § 131D-2 means the will-
  ful or grossly negligent infliction of physical pain, injury, or mental
  anguish, unreasonable confinement, or the willful or grossly negligent
  deprivation by the administrator or staff of an adult care home of
  services which are necessary to maintain mental and physical health.

“Neglect” under § 108A-101 refers to a disabled adult who is either living
alone and not able to provide for himself the services which are necessary to
maintain his mental or physical health or is not receiving services from his
caretaker. A person is not receiving services from his caretaker if, among
other things and not by way of limitation, he is a resident of one of the
State-owned hospitals for the mentally ill, centers for the mentally retarded
or North Carolina Special Care Center he is, in the opinion of the profes-
sional staff of that hospital or center, mentally incompetent to give his
consent to medical treatment, he has no legal guardian appointed pursuant
to Chapter 35A, or guardian as defined in G.S. 122C-3(15), and he needs
medical treatment. “Neglect” occurs under § 14-32.3 when a person is a
caretaker of a disabled or elder adult who is residing in a domestic setting
218                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

and, wantonly, recklessly, or with gross carelessness: (i) fails to provide
medical or hygienic care, or (ii) confines or restrains the disabled or elder
adult in a place or under a condition that is unsafe, and as a result of the act
or failure to act the disabled or elder adult suffers mental or physical injury.

  INSTITUTIONAL NEGLECT: “Neglect” under § 131D-2 means the
  failure to provide the services necessary to maintain a resident’s physi-
  cal or mental health.

“Exploitation” under § 108A-101 means the illegal or improper use of a
disabled adult or his resources for another’s profit or advantage. “Exploi-
tation” under § 14-32.3 occurs when a person is a caretaker of a disabled
or elder adult who is residing in a domestic setting, and knowingly, will-
fully, and with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of property or
money: (i) makes a false representation, (ii) abuses a position of trust or
fiduciary duty, or (iii) coerces, commands, or threatens, and, as a result of
the act, the disabled or elder adult gives or loses possession and control of
property or money.

  INSTITUTIONAL EXPLOITATION: “Exploitation” under § 131D-
  2 means the illegal or improper use of an aged or disabled resident or
  his resources for another’s profit or advantage.

“Disabled adult” under § 108A-101 shall mean any person 18 years of age
or over or any lawfully emancipated minor who is present in the State of
North Carolina and who is physically or mentally incapacitated due to
mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, or autism; organic brain dam-
age caused by advanced age or other physical degeneration in connection
therewith; or due to conditions incurred at any age which are the result of
accident, organic brain damage, mental or physical illness, or continued
consumption or absorption of substances.

“Disabled adult” under § 14-32.3 means a person 18 years of age or older
or a lawfully emancipated minor who is present in the State of North
Carolina and who is physically or mentally incapacitated as defined in G.S.
108A-101(d).

“Elder adult” under § 14-32.3 means a person 60 years of age or older who
is not able to provide for the social, medical, psychiatric, psychological,
financial, or legal services necessary to safeguard the person’s rights and
resources and to maintain the person’s physical and mental well-being.

“Resident” under § 131D-2 means a person living in an assisted living
APPENDIX B                                                                219

residence for the purpose of obtaining access to housing and services pro-
vided or made available by housing management.

“Caretaker” under § 108A-101 and § 14-32.3 shall mean an individual
who has the responsibility for the care of the disabled adult as a result of
family relationship or who has assumed the responsibility for the care of the
disabled adult voluntarily or by contract.


NORTH DAKOTA: N.D. Cent. Code § 50-25.2-01 (2001)

“Abuse” means any willful act or omission of a caregiver or any other
person, which results in physical injury, mental anguish, unreasonable con-
finement, sexual abuse or exploitation, or financial exploitation to or of a
vulnerable adult.

“Neglect” means the failure of a caregiver to provide essential services
necessary to maintain the physical and mental health of a vulnerable adult,
or the inability or lack of desire of the vulnerable adult to provide essential
services necessary to maintain and safeguard the vulnerable adult’s own
physical and mental health.

“Financial exploitation” means the taking or misuse of property or re-
sources of a vulnerable adult by means of undue influence, breach of a
fiduciary relationship, deception, harassment, criminal coercion, theft, or
other unlawful or improper means.

“Vulnerable adult” means an adult who has a substantial mental or func-
tional impairment.

“Caregiver” means any person who has assumed the legal responsibility or
a contractual obligation for the care of a vulnerable adult or has voluntarily
assumed responsibility for the care of a vulnerable adult. The term includes
a facility operated by any public or private agency, organization, or institu-
tion which provides services to, and has assumed responsibility for the care
of, a vulnerable adult.


OHIO: ORC Ann. §§ 2903.33, 3721.21, 3722.12, 5101.60 (2001)

“Abuse” under § 5101.60 means the infliction upon an adult by self or
others of injury, unreasonable confinement, intimidation, or cruel punish-
ment with resulting physical harm, pain, or mental anguish.
220                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

“Abuse” under § 2903.33 means knowingly causing physical harm or reck-
lessly causing serious physical harm to a person by physical contact with
the person or by the inappropriate use of a physical or chemical restraint,
medication, or isolation on the person.

  INSTITUTIONAL ABUSE: “Abuse” under § 3721.21 means know-
  ingly causing physical harm or recklessly causing serious physical
  harm to a resident by physical contact with the resident or by use of
  physical or chemical restraint, medication, or isolation as punish-
  ment, for staff convenience, excessively, as a substitute for treatment,
  or in amounts that preclude habilitation and treatment.

  “Abuse” under § 3722.12 means the unreasonable confinement or
  intimidation of a resident, or the infliction of injury or cruel punish-
  ment upon a resident, resulting in physical harm, pain, or mental
  anguish.

“Neglect” under § 5101.60 means the failure of an adult to provide for self
the goods or services necessary to avoid physical harm, mental anguish, or
mental illness or the failure of a caretaker to provide such goods or services.

“Gross neglect” under § 2903.33 means knowingly failing to provide a
person with any treatment, care, goods, or service that is necessary to
maintain the health or safety of the person when the failure results in
physical harm or serious physical harm to the person. “Neglect” means
recklessly failing to provide a person with any treatment, care, goods, or
service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the person when
the failure results in serious physical harm to the person.

  INSTITUTIONAL NEGLECT: “Neglect” under § 3721.21 means
  recklessly failing to provide a resident with any treatment, care, goods,
  or service necessary to maintain the health or safety of the resident
  when the failure results in serious physical harm to the resident. “Ne-
  glect” does not include allowing a resident, at the resident’s option, to
  receive only treatment by spiritual means through prayer in accor-
  dance with the tenets of a recognized religious denomination.

“Neglect” under § 3722.12 means failure to provide a resident with goods
or services necessary to prevent physical harm, mental anguish, or mental
illness.
APPENDIX B                                                                 221

“Exploitation” under § 5101.60 means the unlawful or improper act of a
caretaker using an adult or an adult’s resources for monetary or personal
benefit, profit, or gain.

  INSTITUTIONAL MISAPPROPRIATION: “Misappropriation” un-
  der § 3721.21 means depriving, defrauding, or otherwise obtaining
  the real or personal property of a resident by any means prohibited by
  the Revised Code, including violations of Chapter 2911 or 2913 of
  the Revised Code.

  “Exploitation” under § 3722.12 means the unlawful or improper
  utilization of an adult resident or his resources for personal or mon-
  etary benefit, profit, or gain.

“Adult” under § 5101.60 means any person 60 years of age or older within
this state who is handicapped by the infirmities of aging or who has a
physical or mental impairment which prevents the person from providing
for the person’s own care or protection, and who resides in an independent
living arrangement. An “independent living arrangement” is a domicile of a
person’s own choosing, including, but not limited to, a private home, apart-
ment, trailer, or rooming house. Except as otherwise provided in this divi-
sion, “independent living arrangement” includes a community alternative
home licensed pursuant to § 3724.03 of the Revised Code but does not
include other institutions or facilities licensed by the state, or facilities in
which a person resides as a result of voluntary, civil, or criminal commit-
ment. “Independent living arrangement” does include adult care facilities
licensed pursuant to Chapter 3722 of the Revised Code.

“Caretaker” under § 5101.60 means the person assuming the responsibility
for the care of an adult on a voluntary basis, by contract, through receipt of
payment for care, as a result of a family relationship, or by order of a court
of competent jurisdiction.


OKLAHOMA: 43A Okl. St. § 10-103 (2000); 63 Okl. St. § 1-1902 (2000);
63 Okl. St. § 1-820 (2000)

“Abuse” under § 10-103 means the intentional infliction of physical pain,
injury, sexual abuse, or mental anguish or the deprivation of food, clothing,
shelter, or medical care to a vulnerable adult by a caretaker or other person
responsible for providing these services.
222                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

  INSITUTIONAL ABUSE: “Abuse” under § 1-1902 and § 1-820
  means the willful infliction of injury, unreasonable confinement, in-
  timidation or punishment, with resulting physical harm, impairment
  or mental anguish.

“Neglect” under § 10-103 means the failure to provide protection for a
vulnerable adult who is unable to protect the person’s own interest; or the
failure to provide adequate shelter or clothing; or the harming or threaten-
ing with harm through action or inaction by either another individual or
through the person’s own action or inaction because of a lack of awareness,
incompetence, or incapacity, which has resulted or may result in physical or
mental injury.

  INSTITUTIONAL NEGLECT: “Neglect” under § 1-1902 and § 1-
  820 means failure to provide goods and/or services necessary to avoid
  physical harm, mental anguish, or mental illness.

“Exploitation” or “exploit” under § 10-103 means an unjust or improper
use of the resources of a vulnerable adult for the profit or advantage,
pecuniary or otherwise, of a person other than the vulnerable adult through
the use of undue influence, coercion, harassment, duress, deception, false
representation or false pretense.

“Vulnerable adult” under § 10-103 means an individual who is an inca-
pacitated person or who, because of physical or mental disability, incapac-
ity, or other disability, is substantially impaired in the ability to provide
adequately for the care or custody of self, or is unable to manage his or her
property and financial affairs effectively, or to meet essential requirements
for mental or physical health or safety, or to protect self from abuse,
neglect, or exploitation without assistance from others.

“Resident” under § 1-1902 means a person residing in a facility due to
illness, physical or mental infirmity, or advanced age.

“Caretaker” under § 10-103 means a person who has: a. the responsibility
for the care of the person or financial management of the resources of the
vulnerable adult as a result of a family relationship, b. assumed the respon-
sibility for the care of the vulnerable adult voluntarily, by contract, or as a
result of the ties of friendship, or c. been appointed a guardian, limited
guardian, or conservator pursuant to the Oklahoma Guardianship and
Conservatorship Act.
APPENDIX B                                                                223

OREGON: ORS §§ 124.005, 441.630 (1999)

“Abuse” under § 124.005 means one or more of the following:
(a) Any physical injury caused by other than accidental means, or that
appears to be at variance with the explanation given of the injury. (b)
Neglect that leads to physical harm through withholding of services neces-
sary to maintain health and well-being. (c) Abandonment, including deser-
tion or willful forsaking of an elderly or disabled person or the withdrawal
or neglect of duties and obligations owed an elderly or disabled person by a
caregiver or other person. (d) Willful infliction of physical pain or injury.
(e) Use of derogatory or inappropriate names, phrases, or profanity, ridi-
cule, harassment, coercion, threats, cursing, intimidation or inappropriate
sexual comments of such a nature as to threaten significant physical or
emotional harm to the elderly or disabled person. (f) Causing any sweep-
stakes promotion to be mailed to an elderly, disabled, or incapacitated
person who had received sweepstakes promotional material in the United
States mail, spent more than $500 in the preceding year on any sweepstakes
promotions, or any combination of sweepstakes promotions from the same
service, regardless of the identities of the originators of the sweepstakes
promotion and who represented to the court that the person felt the need
for the court’s assistance to prevent the person from incurring further ex-
pense.

INSTITUTIONAL ABUSE: “Abuse” under § 441.630 means: (a) Any
physical injury to a resident of a long-term care facility which has been
caused by other than accidental means. (b) Failure to provide basic care or
services, which failure results in physical harm or unreasonable discomfort
or serious loss of human dignity. (c) Sexual contact with a resident caused
by an employee, agent, or other resident of a long-term care facility by
force, threat, duress ,or coercion. (d) Illegal or improper use of a resident’s
resources for the personal profit or gain of another person. (e) Verbal or
mental abuse as prohibited by federal law. (f) Corporal punishment. (g)
Involuntary seclusion for convenience or discipline.

“Elderly person” under § 124.005 means any person 65 years of age or
older who is not subject to the provisions of ORS 441.640 to 441.665.


PENNSYLVANIA: 35 P.S. § 10225.103 (2001); 63 P.S. § 672 (2001)

“Abuse” under § 10225.103 and § 672 means the occurrence of one or
more of the following acts: (1) The infliction of injury, unreasonable con-
finement, intimidation or punishment with resulting physical harm, pain,
224                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

or mental anguish. (2) The willful deprivation by a caretaker of goods or
services which are necessary to maintain physical or mental health. (3)
Sexual harassment, rape or abuse, as defined in the act of October 7, 1976
(P.L. 1090, No. 218), known as the Protection From Abuse Act. No older
adult shall be found to be abused solely on the grounds of environmental
factors which are beyond the control of the older adult or the caretaker,
such as inadequate housing, furnishings, income, clothing, or medical care.

“Neglect” under § 10225.103 means the failure to provide for oneself or
the failure of a caretaker to provide goods or services essential to avoid a
clear and serious threat to physical or mental health. No older adult who
does not consent to the provision of protective services shall be found to be
neglected solely on the grounds of environmental factors which are beyond
the control of the older adult or the caretaker, such as inadequate housing,
furnishings, income, clothing, or medical care.

“Exploitation” under § 10225.103 means an act or course of conduct by a
caretaker or other person against an older adult or an older adult’s re-
sources, without the informed consent of the older adult or with consent
obtained through misrepresentation, coercion, or threats of force, that re-
sults in monetary, personal or other benefit, gain or profit for the perpetra-
tor or monetary or personal loss to the older adult.

“Older adult” under § 10225.103 means a person within the jurisdiction of
the Commonwealth who is 60 years of age or older. “Older adult in need
of protective services” means an incapacitated older adult who is unable to
perform or obtain services that are necessary to maintain physical or mental
health, for whom there is no responsible caretaker and who is at imminent
risk of danger to his person or property.

“Caretaker” under § 10225.103 means an individual or institution that has
assumed the responsibility for the provision of care needed to maintain the
physical or mental health of an older adult. This responsibility may arise
voluntarily, by contract, by receipt of payment for care, as a result of family
relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. It is not the
intent of this act to impose responsibility on any individual if such respon-
sibility would not otherwise exist in law.


RHODE ISLAND: R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 23-17.8-1, 42-66-4.1 (2001)

“Abuse” under § 42-66-4.1 means the subjection of an elderly person to the
willful infliction of physical pain, or willful deprivation of services by a
APPENDIX B                                                               225

caretaker or other person with a duty of care for the elderly person. Abuse
also includes neglect, abandonment, and exploitation.

  INSTITUTIONAL ABUSE: “Abuse” under § 23-17.8-1 means:
  (i) Any assault as defined in chapter 5 of title 11, including, but not
  limited to, hitting, kicking, pinching, slapping, or the pulling of hair,
  provided, however, unless such is required as an element of the of-
  fense charged, it shall not be necessary to prove that the patient or
  resident was injured thereby, or; (ii) Any assault as defined in chapter
  37 of title 11, or; (iii) Any offense under chapter 10 of title 11, or;
  (iv) Any conduct which harms or is likely to physically harm the
  patient or resident except where the conduct is a part of the care and
  treatment, and in furtherance of the health and safety of the patient or
  resident, or (v) Intentionally engaging in a pattern of harassing con-
  duct which causes or is likely to cause emotional or psychological
  harm to the patient or resident, including but not limited to, ridiculing
  or demeaning a patient or resident, making derogatory remarks to a
  patient or resident or cursing directed towards a patient or resident,
  or threatening to inflict physical or emotional harm on a patient or
  resident.

  “Mistreatment” under § 23-17.8-1 means the inappropriate use of
  medications, isolation, or use of physical or chemical restraints (1) as
  punishment, (2) for staff convenience, (3) as a substitute for treatment
  or care, (4) in conflict with a physician’s order, (5) or in quantities
  which inhibit effective care or treatment, which harms or is likely to
  harm the patient or resident.

“Neglect” under § 42-66-4.1 means the willful refusal to provide services
necessary to maintain physical and mental health on the part of a caretaker
or other person with a duty of care.

  INSTITUTIONAL NEGLECT: “Neglect” under § 23-17.8-1 means
  the intentional failure to provide treatment, care, goods, and services
  necessary to maintain the health and safety of the patient or resident,
  or the intentional failure to carry out a plan of treatment or care
  prescribed by the physician of the patient or resident, or the inten-
  tional failure to report patient or resident health problems or changes
  in health problems or changes in health conditions to an immediate
  supervisor or nurse, or the intentional lack of attention to the physical
  needs of a patient or resident including, but not limited to toileting,
  bathing, meals, and safety. Provided, however, no person shall be
  considered to be neglected for the sole reason that he or she relies on
226                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

  or is being furnished treatment in accordance with the tenets and
  teachings of a well recognized church or denomination by a duly
  accredited practitioner thereof.

“Exploitation” under § 42-66-4.1 means an act or process of taking pecu-
niary advantage of an elderly person by use of undue influence, harassment,
duress, deception, false representation, or false pretenses.


SOUTH CAROLINA: S.C. Code Ann. § 43-35-10 (2000)

“Abuse” means physical abuse or psychological abuse. “Physical abuse”
means intentionally inflicting or allowing to be inflicted physical injury on
a vulnerable adult by an act or failure to act. Physical abuse includes, but is
not limited to, slapping, hitting, kicking, biting, choking, pinching, burn-
ing, actual or attempted sexual battery as defined in Section 16-3-651, use
of medication outside the standards of reasonable medical practice for the
purpose of controlling behavior, and unreasonable confinement. Physical
abuse also includes the use of a restrictive or physically intrusive procedure
to control behavior for the purpose of punishment except that a therapeutic
procedure prescribed by a licensed physician or other qualified professional
or that is part of a written plan of care by a licensed physician or other
qualified professional is not considered physical abuse. Physical abuse does
not include altercations or acts of assault between vulnerable adults. “Psy-
chological abuse” means deliberately subjecting a vulnerable adult to threats
or harassment or other forms of intimidating behavior causing fear, humili-
ation, degradation, agitation, confusion, or other forms of serious emo-
tional distress.

“Neglect” means the failure or omission of a caregiver to provide the care,
goods, or services necessary to maintain the health or safety of a vulnerable
adult including, but not limited to, food, clothing, medicine, shelter, super-
vision, and medical services. Neglect may be repeated conduct or a single
incident which has produced or can be proven to result in serious physical
or psychological harm or substantial risk of death. Noncompliance with
regulatory standards alone does not constitute neglect. Neglect includes the
inability of a vulnerable adult, in the absence of a caretaker, to provide for
his or her own health or safety which produces or could reasonably be
expected to produce serious physical or psychological harm or substantial
risk of death.

“Exploitation” means: (a) causing or requiring a vulnerable adult to en-
gage in activity or labor which is improper, illegal, or against the reasonable
APPENDIX B                                                               227

and rational wishes of the vulnerable adult. Exploitation does not include
requiring a vulnerable adult to participate in an activity or labor which is a
part of a written plan of care or which is prescribed or authorized by a
licensed physician attending the patient; or (b) an improper, illegal, or
unauthorized use of the funds, assets, property, power of attorney, guard-
ianship, or conservatorship of a vulnerable adult by a person for the profit
or advantage of that person or another person.

“Vulnerable adult” means a person 18 years of age or older who has a
physical or mental condition which substantially impairs the person from
adequately providing for his or her own care or protection. This includes a
person who is impaired in the ability to adequately provide for the person’s
own care or protection because of the infirmities of aging including, but not
limited to, organic brain damage, advanced age, and physical, mental, or
emotional dysfunction. A resident of a facility is a vulnerable adult.

“Caregiver” means a person who provides care to a vulnerable adult, with
or without compensation, on a temporary or permanent or full or part-time
basis and includes, but is not limited to, a relative, household member, day
care personnel, adult foster home sponsor, and personnel of a public or
private institution or facility.


SOUTH DAKOTA: S.D. Codified Laws § 22-46-1 (2001)

“Abuse” means physical harm, bodily injury, or attempt to cause physical
harm or injury, or the infliction of fear of imminent physical harm or bodily
injury on a disabled adult.

“Neglect” means harm to a disabled adult’s health or welfare, without
reasonable medical justification, caused by the conduct of a person respon-
sible for the adult’s health or welfare, within the means available for the
disabled adult, including the failure to provide adequate food, clothing,
shelter, or medical care. If a disabled adult is under treatment solely by
spiritual means, the court may, upon good cause shown, order that medical
treatment be provided for that disabled adult.

“Exploitation” means the wrongful taking or exercising of control over
property of a disabled adult with intent to defraud him of it.

“Disabled adult” means a person eighteen years of age or older who suffers
from a condition of mental retardation, infirmities of aging as manifested
by organic brain damage, advanced age, or other physical dysfunctioning to
228                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

the extent that the person is unable to protect himself or provide for his
own care.


TENNESSEE: Tenn. Code Ann. § 71-6-102 (2001)

“Abuse or neglect” means the infliction of physical pain, injury, or mental
anguish, or the deprivation of services by a caretaker which are necessary to
maintain the health and welfare of an adult or a situation in which an adult
is unable to provide or obtain the services which are necessary to maintain
that person’s health or welfare. Nothing in this part shall be construed to
mean a person is abused or neglected or in need of protective services for
the sole reason that the person relies on or is being furnished treatment by
spiritual means through prayer alone in accordance with a recognized reli-
gious method of healing in lieu of medical treatment; further, nothing in
this part shall be construed to require or authorize the provision of medical
care to any terminally ill person if such person has executed an unrevoked
living will in accordance with the provisions of the Tennessee Right to
Natural Death Law, compiled in title 32, chapter 11, and if the provisions
of such medical care would conflict with the terms of such living will.

“Exploitation” means the improper use by a caretaker of funds which have
been paid by a governmental agency to an adult or to the caretaker for the
use or care of the adult.

“Adult” means a person 18 years of age or older who because of mental or
physical dysfunctioning or advanced age is unable to manage such person’s
own resources, carry out the activities of daily living, or protect such person
from neglect, hazardous or abusive situations without assistance from oth-
ers and who has no available, willing, and responsibly able person for
assistance and who may be in need of protective services.

“Advanced age” means 60 years of age or older.

“Caretaker” means an individual or institution who has the responsibility
for the care of the adult as a result of family relationship, or who has
assumed the responsibility for the care of the adult person voluntarily, or by
contract, or agreement.


TEXAS: Tex. Hum.Res. Code § 48.002 (2000)

“Abuse” means: (A) the negligent or willful infliction of injury, unreason-
APPENDIX B                                                              229

able confinement, intimidation, or cruel punishment with resulting physical
or emotional harm or pain to an elderly or disabled person by the person’s
caretaker, family member, or other individual who has an ongoing relation-
ship with the person; or (B) sexual abuse of an elderly or disabled person,
including any involuntary or nonconsensual sexual conduct that would
constitute an offense under Section 21.08, Penal Code (indecent exposure)
or Chapter 22, Penal Code (assaultive offenses), committed by the person’s
caretaker, family member, or other individual who has an ongoing relation-
ship with the person.

“Neglect” means the failure to provide for one’s self the goods or services,
including medical services, which are necessary to avoid physical or emo-
tional harm or pain or the failure of a caretaker to provide such goods or
services.

“Exploitation” means the illegal or improper act or process of a caretaker,
family member, or other individual who has an ongoing relationship with
the elderly or disabled person using the resources of an elderly or disabled
person for monetary or personal benefit, profit, or gain without the in-
formed consent of the elderly or disabled person.

“Elderly person” means a person 65 years of age or older.

“Disabled person” means a person with a mental, physical, or developmen-
tal disability that substantially impairs the person’s ability to provide ad-
equately for the person’s care or protection and who is: (A) 18 years of age
or older; or (B) under 18 years of age and who has had the disabilities of
minority removed.


UTAH: Utah Code Ann. §§ 62A-3-301, 76-5-111 (2001)

“Abuse” under § 62A-3-301 means: (a) attempting to cause, or intention-
ally or knowingly causing physical harm or intentionally placing another in
fear of imminent physical harm; (b) physical injury caused by criminally
negligent acts or omissions; (c) unlawful detention or unreasonable confine-
ment; (d) gross lewdness; or (e) deprivation of life-sustaining treatment,
except: (i) as provided in Title 75, Chapter 2, Part 11, Personal Choice and
Living Will Act; or (ii) when informed consent, as defined in Section 76-5-
111, has been obtained.

“Elder abuse” under § 62A-3-301 means abuse, neglect, or exploitation of
an elder adult. “Emotional or psychological abuse” means deliberate con-
230                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

duct that is directed at a disabled or elder adult through verbal or nonverbal
means, and that causes the disabled or elder adult to suffer emotional
distress or to fear bodily injury, harm, or restraint.

“Abuse” under § 76-5-111 means: (i) attempting to cause, or causing physi-
cal harm; (ii) placing another in fear of imminent physical harm; (iii) physi-
cal injury caused by acts or omissions; (iv) unlawful detention or unreason-
able confinement; (v) gross lewdness; or (vi) deprivation of life-sustaining
treatment, except: (A) as provided in Title 75, Chapter 2, Part 11, Personal
Choice and Living Will Act; or (B) when informed consent has been ob-
tained.

“Neglect” under § 62A-3-301 means: (a) the failure of a caretaker to
provide habilitation, care, nutrition, clothing, shelter, supervision, or medi-
cal care; (b) a pattern of conduct by a caretaker, without the disabled or
elder adult’s informed consent, resulting in deprivation of food, water,
medication, medical services, shelter, cooling, heating, or other services
necessary to maintain minimum physical or mental health; or (c) the failure
or inability of a disabled adult to provide those services for himself.

“Exploitation” under § 62A-3-301 means exploitation of a disabled or
elder adult as that offense is described in Subsection 76-5-111(4).

“Elder adult” under § 62A-3-301 means a person 65 years of age or older.

“Caretaker” under § 62A-3-301 means any person, corporation, or public
institution that has assumed by relationship, contract, or court order the
responsibility to provide food, shelter, clothing, medical, and other necessi-
ties to a disabled or elder adult.


VERMONT: 33 V.S.A. § 6902 (2001)

“Abuse” means: (A) Any treatment of an elderly or disabled adult which
places life, health, or welfare in jeopardy or which is likely to result in
impairment of health; (B) Any conduct committed with an intent or reckless
disregard that such conduct is likely to cause unnecessary harm, unneces-
sary pain or unnecessary suffering to an elderly or disabled adult; (C)
Unnecessary confinement or unnecessary restraint of an elderly or disabled
adult; (D) Any sexual activity with an elderly or disabled adult by a
caregiver, either, while providing a service for which he or she receives
financial compensation, or at a caregiving facility or program; (E) Any
APPENDIX B                                                                231

pattern of malicious behavior which results in impaired emotional well-
being of an elderly or disabled adult.

“Neglect” means the lack of subsistence, medical or other care necessary
for well-being.

“Exploitation” means: (A) Willfully using, withholding, or disposing of
funds or property of an elderly or disabled adult without legal authority for
the wrongful profit or advantage of another; (B) Acquiring possession or
control of or an interest in funds or property of an elderly or disabled adult
through the use of undue influence, harassment, duress, or fraud; (C) The
act of forcing or compelling an elderly or disabled adult against his or her
will to perform services for the profit or advantage of another; (D) Any
sexual activity with an elderly or disabled adult when the elderly or dis-
abled adult does not consent or when the actor knows or should know that
the elderly or disabled adult is incapable of resisting or declining consent to
the sexual activity due to age or disability or due to fear of retribution or
hardship.

“Elderly adult” means an individual who is 60 years of age or older.

“Caregiver” means a person, agency, facility, or other organization with
responsibility for providing subsistence or medical or other care to an
elderly or disabled adult, who has assumed the responsibility voluntarily,
by contract or by an order of the court; or a person providing care including
but not limited to medical care, custodial care, personal care, mental health
services, rehabilitative services, or any other kind of care provided which is
required because of another’s age or disability.


VIRGINIA: Va. Code Ann. §§ 18.2-369, 63.1-55.2 (2001)

“Abuse” under § 63.1-55.2 means the willful infliction of physical pain,
injury, or mental anguish or unreasonable confinement.

“Abuse” under §18.2-369 means (i) knowing and willful conduct that
causes physical injury or pain or (ii) knowing and willful use of physical
restraint, including confinement, as punishment, for convenience or as a
substitute for treatment, except where such conduct or physical restraint,
including confinement, is a part of care or treatment and is in furtherance of
the health and safety of the incapacitated person.
232                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

“Neglect” under § 63.1-55.2 means that an adult is living under such
circumstance that he is not able to provide for himself or is not being
provided such services as are necessary to maintain his physical and mental
health and that the failure to receive such necessary services impairs or
threatens to impair his well-being. “Neglect” under §18.2-369 means the
knowing and willful failure by a responsible person to provide treatment,
care, goods or services which results in injury to the health or endangers the
safety of an incapacitated adult.

“Exploitation” under § 63.1-55.2 means the illegal use of an incapacitated
adult or his resources for another’s profit or advantage.

“Incapacitated person” under § 63.1-55.2 and § 18.2-369 means any adult
(18 or older) who is impaired by reason of mental illness, mental retarda-
tion, physical illness or disability, advanced age or other causes to the
extent that the adult lacks sufficient understanding or capacity to make,
communicate or carry out responsible decisions concerning his or her well-
being.

“Responsible person” under § 18.2-369 means a person who has responsi-
bility for the care, custody or control of an incapacitated person by opera-
tion of law or who has assumed such responsibility voluntarily, by contract
or in fact.


WASHINGTON: Rev. Code Wash. (ARCW) §§ 70.124.020, 74.34.020
(2001)

“Abuse” under § 74.34.020 means the willful action or inaction that in-
flicts injury, unreasonable confinement, intimidation, or punishment on a
vulnerable adult. In instances of abuse of a vulnerable adult who is unable
to express or demonstrate physical harm, pain, or mental anguish, the
abuse is presumed to cause physical harm, pain, or mental anguish. Abuse
includes sexual abuse, mental abuse, physical abuse, and exploitation of a
vulnerable adult, which have the following meanings: (a) “Sexual abuse”
means any form of nonconsensual sexual contact, including but not limited
to unwanted or inappropriate touching, rape, sodomy, sexual coercion,
sexually explicit photographing, and sexual harassment. Sexual abuse in-
cludes any sexual contact between a staff person, who is not also a resident
or client, of a facility or a staff person of a program authorized under
chapter 71A.12 RCW, and a vulnerable adult living in that facility or
receiving service from a program authorized under chapter 71A.12 RCW,
whether or not it is consensual. (b) “Physical abuse” means the willful
APPENDIX B                                                                  233

action of inflicting bodily injury or physical mistreatment. Physical abuse
includes, but is not limited to, striking with or without an object, slapping,
pinching, choking, kicking, shoving, prodding, or the use of chemical re-
straints or physical restraints unless the restraints are consistent with licens-
ing requirements, and includes restraints that are otherwise being used
inappropriately. (c) “Mental abuse” means any willful action or inaction of
mental or verbal abuse. Mental abuse includes, but is not limited to, coer-
cion, harassment, inappropriately isolating a vulnerable adult from family,
friends, or regular activity, and verbal assault that includes ridiculing, in-
timidating, yelling, or swearing. “Exploitation” means an act of forcing,
compelling, or exerting undue influence over a vulnerable adult causing the
vulnerable adult to act in a way that is inconsistent with relevant past
behavior, or causing the vulnerable adult to perform services for the benefit
of another.

  INSTITUTIONAL ABUSE/ NEGLECT: “Abuse or neglect” or “pa-
  tient abuse or neglect” under § 70.124.020 means the nonaccidental
  physical injury or condition, sexual abuse, or negligent treatment of a
  state hospital patient under circumstances which indicate that the
  patient’s health, welfare, or safety is harmed thereby.

“Neglect” under § 74.34.020 means (a) a pattern of conduct or inaction by
a person or entity with a duty of care to provide the goods and services that
maintain physical or mental health of a vulnerable adult, or that avoids or
prevents physical or mental harm or pain to a vulnerable adult; or (b) an act
or omission that demonstrates a serious disregard of consequences of such
a magnitude as to constitute a clear and present danger to the vulnerable
adult’s health, welfare, or safety.

“Exploitation” under § 74.34.020 means an act of forcing, compelling, or
exerting undue influence over a vulnerable adult causing the vulnerable
adult to act in a way that is inconsistent with relevant past behavior, or
causing the vulnerable adult to perform services for the benefit of another.
“Financial exploitation” means the illegal or improper use of the property,
income, resources, or trust funds of the vulnerable adult by any person for
any person’s profit or advantage.

“Vulnerable adult” under § 74.34.020 includes a person: (a) 60 years of
age or older who has the functional, mental, or physical inability to care for
himself or herself; or (b) Found incapacitated under chapter 11.88 RCW; or
(c) Who has a developmental disability as defined under RCW 71A.10.020;
or (d) Admitted to any facility; or (e) Receiving services from home health,
234                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

hospice, or home care agencies licensed or required to be licensed under
chapter 70.127 RCW; or (f) Receiving services from an individual provider.


WEST VIRGINIA: W.Va. Code §§ 9-6-1, 61-2-29 (2001)

“Abuse” under § 9-6-1 means the infliction or threat to inflict physical pain
or injury on or the imprisonment of any incapacitated adult or facility
resident.

“Abuse” under § 61-2-29 means infliction or threat to inflict physical pain
or injury on an incapacitated adult.

“Neglect” under § 9-6-1 means: (A) The failure to provide the necessities of
life to an incapacitated adult or facility resident with intent to coerce or
physically harm the incapacitated adult or resident; and (B) the unlawful
expenditure or willful dissipation of the funds or other assets owned or paid
to or for the benefit of an incapacitated adult or resident. “Neglect” under
§ 61-2-29 means (i) the failure to provide the necessities of life to an
incapacitated adult or (ii) the unlawful expenditure or willful dissipation of
the funds or other assets owned or paid to or for the benefit of an incapaci-
tated adult.

“Incapacitated adult” under § 9-6-1 and § 61-2-29 means any person who
by reason of physical, mental, or other infirmity is unable to independently
carry on the daily activities of life necessary to sustaining life and reason-
able health.

“Caregiver” under § 61-2-29 means an adult who has or shares actual
physical possession or care of an incapacitated adult on a full-time or
temporary basis, regardless of whether such person has been designated as
a guardian of such adult by any contract, agreement, or legal proceeding.
Caregiver includes health care providers, family members, and any person
who otherwise voluntarily accepts a supervisory role towards an incapaci-
tated adult.


WISCONSIN: Wis. Stat. §§ 46.90, 55.01, 940.285, 940.295 (2000)

“Abuse” under § 46.90 means the willful infliction on an elder person of
physical pain or injury or unreasonable confinement.
APPENDIX B                                                               235

“Abuse” under § 55.01 means any of the following: (a) An act, omission, or
course of conduct by another that is inflicted intentionally or recklessly and
that does at least one of the following: 1. Results in bodily harm or great
bodily harm to a vulnerable adult. 2. Intimidates, humiliates, threatens,
frightens, or otherwise harasses a vulnerable adult. (b) The forcible admin-
istration of medication to a vulnerable adult, with the knowledge that no
lawful authority exists for the forcible administration. (c) An act that con-
stitutes first degree, second degree, third degree, or fourth degree sexual
assault as specified under § 940.225.

“Maltreatment” under § 940.285 includes any of the following conduct: 1.
Conduct that causes or could reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm
or great bodily harm. 2. Restraint, isolation, or confinement that causes or
could reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm or great bodily harm or
mental or emotional damage, including harm to the vulnerable adults psy-
chological or intellectual functioning that is exhibited by severe anxiety,
depression, withdrawal, regression, or outward aggressive behavior or a
combination of these behaviors. This subdivision does not apply to re-
straint, isolation, or confinement by order of a court or other lawful au-
thority. 3. Deprivation of a basic need for food, shelter, clothing or per-
sonal or health care, including deprivation resulting from the failure to
provide or arrange for a basic need by a person who has assumed responsi-
bility for meeting the need voluntarily or by contract, agreement, or court
order.

“Neglect” under § 55.01means an act, omission, or course of conduct that,
because of the failure to provide adequate food, shelter, clothing, medical
care or dental care, creates a significant danger to the physical or mental
health of a vulnerable adult.

  INSTITUTIONAL NEGLECT: “Neglect” under § 940.295 means an
  act, omission, or course of conduct by another that, because of the
  failure to provide adequate food, shelter, clothing, medical care or
  dental care, creates a significant danger to the physical or mental
  health of a patient or resident.

“Material abuse” under § 46.90 means the misuse of an elder persons
property or financial resources.

“Misappropriation of property” under § 55.01 means any of the following:
(a) The intentional taking, carrying away, use, transfer, concealment, or
retention of possession of the property of a vulnerable adult without the
vulnerable adult’s informed consent and with intent to deprive the vulner-
236                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

able adult of possession of the property. (b) Obtaining the property of a
vulnerable adult by intentionally deceiving the vulnerable adult with a
representation that is known to be a false representation, is made with
intent to defraud, and does defraud the vulnerable adult.

“Elder person” under § 46.90 means a person who is age 60 or older or
who is subject to the infirmities of aging.

“Vulnerable adult” under § 940.285 means any person 18 years of age or
older who either is a developmentally disabled person or has infirmities of
aging, mental illness, or other like incapacities and who is: 1. Substantially
mentally incapable of providing for his or her needs for food, shelter,
clothing or personal or health care; or 2. Unable to report cruel maltreat-
ment without assistance.

“Caretaker” under § 55.01 means the person, if any, who takes care of a
vulnerable adult voluntarily or under a contract for care.


WYOMING: Wyo. Stat. § 35-20-102 (2001)

“Abuse” means the willful infliction, whether by another person or self-
inflicted, of physical pain, injury, unreasonable confinement or deprivation,
which conduct threatens the welfare and well being of a disabled adult.

  Defined separately: Abandonment means leaving a disabled adult
  without financial support or the means or ability to obtain food,
  clothing, shelter, or health care.

“Neglect” means the deprivation, including self-deprivation, of the mini-
mum food, shelter, clothing, supervision, physical and mental health care,
and other care necessary to maintain a disabled adult’s life or health, or
which may result in a life-threatening situation. The withholding of health
care from a disabled adult is not neglect if: (A) Treatment is given in good
faith by spiritual means alone, through prayer, by a duly accredited practi-
tioner in accordance with the tenets and practices of a recognized church or
religious denomination; or (B) The withholding of health care is in accor-
dance with a declaration executed pursuant to W.S. 35-22-101 through 35-
22-109.

“Exploitation” means taking advantage of a disabled adult or of his physi-
cal or financial resources for personal or pecuniary profit by the use of
APPENDIX B                                                              237

undue influence, harassment, duress, deception, false representation, or
false pretenses.

“Disabled adult” means any person 18 years of age or older who is unable
unassisted to properly manage and take care of himself or his property as a
result of the infirmities of advanced age, physical or mental disability, or
the use of alcohol or controlled substances.

“Caretaker” means any person or agency responsible for the day to day
care of a disabled adult because of: (A) A family relationship; (B) Voluntary
assumption of responsibility for day to day care; (C) Court ordered respon-
sibility or placement; (D) Rendering services on adult workshop or adult
residential programs; or (E) Rendering services in an institution or in com-
munity-based programs.
                                   APPENDIX
                            C
                Elder Abuse and Neglect:
                  History and Concepts
                                  Rosalie Wolf




                          G  ood afternoon and thank you for the opportu-
nity to address you on this important topic. I am going to quickly cover
definitions, history, theories, risk factors, consequences, assessment instru-
ments, prevalence, and interventions, if we have enough time.


                                  DEFINITIONS
     Elder abuse has been used as an all-inclusive term that is often used to
represent physical abuse. So that already indicates that there are differences
in the way elder abuse is interpreted. It may involve relationships between
spouses, adult children, other relatives, maybe friends, and anyone else in
whom the older person has placed trust. Other behavior that is considered
abusive may depend on its duration, its frequency, its intensity, its inten-
tionality, and the consequences.


                                     HISTORY
    Although elder abuse first appeared on the national scene in the late
1970s, the formal efforts to help vulnerable elders began at least two de-
cades before that time. Public welfare officials were faced with an increas-



 NOTE: This is an edited transcript of the text of a presentation to the Panel on Elder
Abuse and Neglect, May 24, 2001.

                                         238
APPENDIX C                                                                 239

ing number of older persons who were unable to manage on their own and
began to develop a new approach to providing services, which they called
“protective services units.” It was an approach that would provide not
only social services, but also legal assistance, particularly guardianship.
     As a result of this interest in the 1950s, Congress passed legislation, as
part of the Social Security Act, providing funds to the states on a three-to-
one matching basis for setting up these protective service units. Some states
took advantage of these federal dollars. In addition, Congress provided
funds for six demonstration projects (they might represent the very first
research on adult protective services).
     One of those demonstration projects supported a team at the Benjamin
Rose Institute in Cleveland under Margaret Blenkner and her associates.
She matched a group of elders receiving protective services with a group
from the community who were receiving traditional services and found
that, during the grant period, those who received protective services had a
higher mortality rate and higher nursing home placement rate than those
who received traditional services.
     But the advocates for the system went right ahead with their work in
the Congress and in 1974, despite some of the findings of that study and
five other studies that showed these protective services units to be very
costly and of questionable effect (U.S. Department of Health, Education,
and Welfare, 1966), Congress amended the Social Security Act to mandate
protective service units in all states for adults over the age of 18. The target
populations were people with mental and physical impairments who were
unable to manage on their own and who had been or were being exploited
or neglected. There was a lot of criticism of these programs, partly because
they were so costly and partly because they seemed to infringe on the rights
of the elders.
     Interest temporarily waned on adult protective services, but at about
the same time (middle to late 1970s), renewed interest in elder abuse be-
came apparent, in part due to congressional hearings (U.S. House of Repre-
sentatives, 1978, 1979). At one of those hearings, a witness spoke about
“granny battering.” The topic began to interest some of the members of
Congress, particularly the late Claude Pepper of Florida. He and his Special
Subcommittee on Aging sponsored other investigations and hearings, and
there were, I think, two research projects submitted to the Administration
on Aging for a discretionary grant that were of questionable methodology,
but they did, at least, confirm that cases existed.
     This congressional interest in elder abuse served to revive interest in
adult protective services. When members of Congress looked around to see
what was happening to these abused and neglected adults, they saw the
adult protective service units and concluded that it wasn’t necessary to
240                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

establish a new system. Instead, they decided to continue trying to raise
awareness of the problem.
      In 1981, Congress proposed legislation to establish a national center on
elder abuse, but the bill never reached the floor of Congress. Finally, in
1989, Claude Pepper introduced that proposal as an amendment to the
Older Americans Act. The national center was funded the following year
and began the federal government’s specific commitment to this area, albeit
with very small amounts of money. But at least elder abuse had been
recognized in federal legislation.
      Initially the conceptualization of this issue was not of adults needing
protection and safety. It became an aging issue, whereas initially the re-
sponse involved public welfare and the social services and legal services. By
gaining the interest of the aging network, a larger constituency of interested
people became involved.
      It is interesting that the emphasis was on elder abuse and abused elders
in the context of caregiving. The portrait of the problem was that of an
impaired victim, usually an elderly parent being cared for by an adult
caregiver, who wasn’t able to manage the caregiving because of stresses in
life, job, family, and so forth.
      This picture of elder abuse seemed to resonate with Congress. The
media really helped to promote this issue. Together the media and Con-
gress provided the real push for interest in this problem.
      In the 1980s, Surgeon General Louis Sullivan held a workshop on
family violence, declaring it to be a public health and criminal justice issue
that included the problems of elder abuse and neglect. Elder abuse was
included under the umbrella of family violence. That had a very positive
effect, because it brought in the medical community, and the criminal jus-
tice community and broadened the range of constituency groups interested
in the topic
      This was a real positive step forward. Sometimes the social service
people are concerned about the so-called criminalization of the issue, but in
terms of the breadth and depth of interest, it was a very positive step.


                                THEORIES
     A number of theories have been promoted or proposed to explain elder
abuse (Phillips, 1986). I’m not going to review them in depth, but I want to
focus specifically on the “situational theory” because it represented a par-
ticularly popular theory in relation to the image of the overburdened
caregiver. It is true that some caregivers are overburdened, and it is true
that some of them do abuse or neglect the person for whom they are caring.
When you look at some of the cases and some of the studies, you see
perpetrators who are caregivers and who show a history of emotional
APPENDIX C                                                               241

problems, so psychopathology seems to be another way of explaining what
takes place.
    Several additional theories have been used to explain elder abuse:

     • the exchange theory, which describes how some of the dependen-
cies that exist between a victim and a perpetrator relate to tactics and
responses developed in family life, which continue into adulthood;
     • social learning theory, which brings in the whole issue of how
abuse was learned and that spouse abuse among the elderly does exist; and
     • political economic theory, which focuses on the challenges faced by
elders in a society that leaves people in poverty and takes away their impor-
tance in community life. Political economic theory addresses the
marginalization of elders in society.

     People in the field have come to realize that you can’t really explain
such a complicated construct as elder abuse with one theory, and that
perhaps what is needed is something that looks at factors across several
domains. Heist has examined this issue in relation to child abuse, but it has
subsequently been presented in a broader context by the Committee on
Interventions of Family Violence (National Research Council and Institute
of Medicine, 1998) as an ecological model that incorporates and links
individual-level psychopathology and interpersonal relationships in the con-
text of the overall sociocultural environment. That could be exchange
dependency in the caregiver, for example, in the context of the elder com-
munity. For instance, are there services to take care of caregivers with
alcohol problems? And it highlights some of the societal issues, such as the
loss of the importance of older persons in transmitting values and traditions
and certain cultural issues.


                              RISK FACTORS
     In the absence of an overarching theoretical framework, research has
thus far focused on the characteristics of situations and victims and perpe-
trators that constitute risk factors for abuse. I will mention victim depen-
dency, abuser dependence/deviance, social isolation, and living arrange-
ments as examples.
     There is no question that there are some people who are impaired and
neglected, but is impairment necessary? There is a model of family violence
in which victims are generally seen as people unable to leave the situation.
When you think of a younger victim of what I will refer to as intimate
partner violence, this represents the classic “battered woman syndrome.”
When you look at those younger victims, you know that they find it very
difficult to leave a situation. There is a concerted effort on the part of the
242                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

perpetrator to isolate the victim. In child abuse, the child goes to school,
but the family itself is isolated. This may be even more so for older persons
who may be isolated because of physical impairments or loss of friends and
family. Living arrangements are a major focus for examination. Generally,
abuse or neglect takes place in the context of people living together, yet
there is an obligation on the part of adult children, for example, to not
neglect their elders. Theoretical frameworks are in need of great attention.


                            RISK ASSESSMENT
     Moving into risk assessment instruments, since elder abuse first emerged
as a problem, the focus has been on developing some instrument that
determine whether a person is at risk. There are a number of groups
working on this. Hwalek and Sengstock (1986) did some of the earliest
work with funding from the Administration on Aging. They asked many
people from various agencies what items in fact should be considered and
came up with a list in the hundreds, if not thousands; they then conducted
a multivariate analysis and came down to 15 and later to 10 statements
from self-reports on elder abuse. Another study tested those original 15
statements by using the Australian longitudinal study on health, in which
they had a sample of 12,000 women age 65 and older (Kurrle, 1993). They
added two additional intimate family violence questions, coming up with a
brief screening tool of six questions, which were reliable as a test for elder
abuse. The idea is that a physician or any other screener could use these
questions in the interview and could at least identify an at-risk elder.
     A team from Montreal (Reis and Nahmiash, 1998) developed a com-
pletely different screening effort. They had nurses and social workers
conduct a comprehensive interview of clients who had been seen by a social
service agency and screened to determine who was abused. Their original
research across demographics came out with three categories of risk factors
relating to: (1) the abusive caregiver, (2) interpersonal characteristics (per-
sonal alcohol or substance abuse, characteristics of depression, personality
disorder, mental outlook, behavioral problems), and (3) reluctance to dis-
cuss abusive behavior. The last is quite important, but it has not been
followed up. The second category, interpersonal characteristics, includes
poor relationships with the caregiver, marital or family conflict, lack of
empathy for the elder, and financial dependence.


                             CONSEQUENCES
   There has been very little work done on the consequences of elder
abuse, in terms of both the effect on physical health and on mental health.
We know from the family violence area that abuse has a substantial effect
APPENDIX C                                                               243

on the health of women, and that they make up a good proportion of
emergency room admissions. But research on the effects of elder abuse has
been inhibited because of the complexity of untangling the synergistic ef-
fects of aging, and disease in old age from the impact of abuse or neglect.
     There is only one study on the consequences of abuse on physical
health. Lachs and colleagues (1998) used an existing National Institute on
Aging cohort study that looked at the status of the abused elders over a
period of 13 years, examining statistics of physical health, mental health,
social situations, even religious habits, and so forth. They merged that
dataset with one from the adult protective services unit serving New Haven,
Connecticut. That unit, which is in a mandatory reporting state, has been
collecting data since 1978. There were 7 cases of abuse that had been
investigated for corroboration, 57 cases of neglect, and 2,608 cases not
reported but investigated by researchers. They looked at the rate of mortal-
ity and found there was no difference in the first few years, but by the 13th
year there was a decided difference in outcomes: 40 percent of the non-
reported elders were still alive, 13 percent of the “self-neglect” category
were still alive, and 9 percent of the “reported abused” category were still
alive.
     What was interesting is how closely this followed the Blenkner results,
from 30 years earlier. Both showed a higher rate of institutionalization and
a higher rate of nursing home placement. It suggests to me that the inter-
vention itself may be a factor. This would be an important area for re-
search.
     Let me go back to depression. Depression is the only aspect of psycho-
logical abuse that has been explored by researchers at all, and those studies
are very small and the methodology is subject to question. But indeed, if
you look at groups of elders who have been abused, neglected, and ex-
ploited, you find more depression in this group. Commentators have sug-
gested that other causes of emotional distress are also provoked by the acts
of elder abuse or exploitation—depression, fear, guilt, shame, stress, learned
helplessness, and post-traumatic stress syndrome (see, for example,
Goldstein, 1996).


                    PREVALENCE AND INCIDENCE
     Five studies have been done on prevalence in five different countries,
using three or four or five different methodologies, some better than others.
     The first was the Pillemer and Finkelhor (1988) study of the metropoli-
tan Boston area. A representative sample of elders was interviewed over the
telephone, or if the older person was unable to respond on the telephone,
they conducted face-to-face interviews. They found that 3.2 percent of that
sample was abused or neglected. However, they did not include financial
244                                                  ELDER MISTREATMENT

exploitation, which is a real shortcoming of that study. Another shortcom-
ing was the very strict definition in terms of physical abuse and neglect.
They used scales that had been used in the national family violence surveys
to describe physical abuse, which may have been too limiting.
     The Conflict Tactics Scale was also used on a national sample of Cana-
dian elders (Podnieks, 1992). In that sample, Podnieks added financial
exploitation and found several different results: 5 percent of the sample was
financially abused, which was the largest category, followed by physical
abuse and neglect. Podnieks concluded that 4 percent of the population
had been abused, neglected, or financially exploited.
     Researchers in the United Kingdom wanted to do a similar study but
they couldn’t get it through their human subjects review panel, so they
added a few questions from the Boston study to another annual survey in
the United Kingdom (Ogg and Bennett, 1992). They concluded that over-
all, 5 percent of the elders 65 and over had been abused or neglected or
exploited (about 2 percent had been physically abused).
     The next study was done in a small town in Finland (Kivela et al.,
1992). It was a geriatric mental health study by geriatricians in a health
center. They used a completely different methodology, with the subjects
saying whether they were abused or neglected. They defined abuse simply
as the infliction of unnecessary pain or injury. The researchers asked the
subjects if they knew anybody who had been abused, if they had ever been
abused, and then asked the same questions about the issues of exploitation,
sexual abuse, and neglect. They found that 5.7 percent of that representa-
tive sample had been abused.
     The latest study was reported in 1998 in Amsterdam (Comijs et al.,
1998). The researchers added some questions about elder abuse and ne-
glect from the Boston study to a health study being done in a representative
sample of persons 69 and older. They came out with 5.6 percent preva-
lence.
     An incidence study funded by the Administration for Children and
Families and the Administration on Aging (National Center on Elder Abuse,
1998) attempted to answer some of these questions. Its methodology was
questioned, but it was based on the iceberg theory and the assumption that
what is reported to adult protective services is only part of what exists in
the community.
     Because of the shortage of time, I won’t go into it in too great detail.
The study showed that there were 70,942 new cases in 1996. But when
these cases are added to the cases that came in from the sentinels (people,
working in hospitals, senior centers, police departments, and banks), the
total amounted to over 379,000 cases. Although the methodology has been
questioned, there is much to examine in this study.
     One criticism of the methodology stems from the fact that many older,
APPENDIX C                                                                245

vulnerable people do not have any contact with people outside their home
or institution. The National Center on Elder Abuse has tried to find out
how to reach these isolated elders. Currently some demonstration projects
are trying to do that.
    About 470,790 reports came to adult protective services units in the
year 1999, with all states reporting (including Guam and the District of
Columbia) except Mississippi. Of that number, 332,000 were investigated.
That means the others did not meet minimal criteria for conducting an
investigation. It is interesting that some states investigate every report,
while some states do so in a triage arrangement. If it doesn’t seem to be
abuse, they pass it along or refer that case to whatever agency is appropri-
ate. Of those that were investigated, 45 percent were validated.


                              Q & A SESSION
     Richard Bonnie: In the beginning of your talk, you referred to different
images of the problem, as you put it, which appealed to different constitu-
encies. One was the adult in need of protection, then “elder” abuse and
neglect and exploitation, which obviously borrowed from the child abuse
tradition, and then the family violence orientation. You made the observa-
tion that, overall, you thought that this had a positive impact, at least from
the standpoint of building constituencies. But I detected some reservations
among some people, as to whether this interweaving of strands has been a
good thing or not. Could you comment on that?
     Rosalie Wolf: I think it comes mostly from the social service field. I’m
not sure whether that is true today. It was true a few years ago, I believe.
     Bonnie: One thing I am wondering about, in terms of the agenda for
this panel, is that elder abuse is a very complicated construct. There are
these three different strands that you have mentioned, and each one focuses
on a different thing. For example, in the context of adult protective ser-
vices, the “perpetrator,” the third party, is not the centerpiece. It is the
vulnerability of the individual. From the other two perspectives, at least, a
third-party focus emerges.
     I think this explains at least in part some of the confusion about defini-
tions. For a sound research base to develop, isn’t greater cohesion needed
about the concept of elder abuse itself?
     Wolf: I think that the whole criminal justice perspective has brought in
an emphasis on the perpetrator—you’re right, let me say, that the emphasis
previously was totally on the victim. If you look at the laws of the states,
I’m not sure the perpetrator is mentioned at all. Yet, as we know, it could
be a mutual problem, but the perpetrator certainly bears the guilt in these
situations.
     I think when you bring in the criminal justice system, this was definitely
246                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

a result of what had happened earlier with family violence. I think that as
focus has been brought on the perpetrator, prosecution is now an interven-
tion, where it never was before. In the social service field, they felt that
prosecution was not anything that should be done, partly because older
people don’t want to prosecute, they don’t want to bring charges against
their children or their grandchildren. So it was more in keeping with the
wishes of the victim, and prosecution was not a possibility. Then there
were difficulties with perpetrators; it is hard to find them sometimes.
     Constantine Lyketsos: Given that the dementia problem increases with
age, if you look at reports of sentinel events or reports of events in much
higher age groups in which dementia is more prevalent, do you see an
increase of reports of abuse from communities as people get much older?
Do you have any data on that?
     Wolf: There are data in terms of reporting through adult protective
services, which show that the highest number of reports of abuse within the
age categories is among the 85 and over category. However, the prevalence
study showed no difference in age. Since the author of that study is here,
later on he can explain more about that.
     Karl Pillemer: I think one of the reasons for some of the confusion is
that there are two strands or traditions of research that have been used.
One is the Murray Strauss school of family violence research, which is
equally applicable to child abuse or wife abuse when you take a survey
approach. The other has come out of the gerontological family caregiving
tradition, which has looked at caregivers as samples—and hasn’t used the
general population. That typically doesn’t include elderly spouse abuse, for
example, which might occur among healthy elders.
     That is where these lines become a lot less clear. So I think that is one
reason for some of the confusion.
     Wolf: I won’t try to answer the first part, because it raises the whole
issue of why do we segregate a whole service system, how do we approach
the needs of elders. It is a separate service system. Why do we have the
Administration on Aging, for instance?
     Most states use the criterion of people age 18 and over who are vulner-
able. So the vulnerability risk factor shows up very strongly in adult
protective services. Some of the states don’t use that criterion and instead
serve all adults who are 60 or over; in those states, one doesn’t see such a
strong showing of vulnerability as a risk factor.
     For instance, I think the statistics show that in states in which adult
protective services serve younger and older persons with disabilities, about
40 percent of the reports that come in for people age 18 and over are
collected from caregivers. In contrast, the state that I come from, Massa-
chusetts, doesn’t include vulnerability as a criterion. It has physical abuse
and neglect without any necessary indicators. Illinois, which doesn’t have
APPENDIX C                                                                               247

vulnerability as a criterion, either, shows a much higher rate of financial
abuse. The bottom line is that there are all sorts of issues that have to be
taken into account.


                                     REFERENCES
Comijs, H.C., A.M. Pot, H.H. Smit, and C. Jonker
    1998     Elder abuse in the community: Prevalence and consequences. Journal of the
             American Geriatrics Society 46:885-888.
Goldstein, M.
    1996     Elder mistreatment and PTSD. In Aging and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder,
             P.E. Ruskin and J.A. Talbots, eds. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Asso-
             ciation.
Hwalek, M.A., and M.C. Sengstock
    1986     Assessing the probability of abuse in the elderly: Toward development of a clini-
             cal screening instrument. Journal of Applied Gerontology 5(2):153-173.
Kivela, S.L., P. Kongas-Saviaro, E. Kesti, K. Pahkala, and M.L. Ijas
    1992     Abuse in old age: Epidemiological data from Finland. Journal of Elder Abuse
             and Neglect 4(3):1-18.
Kurrle, S.E.
    1993     Elder abuse: A hidden problem. Modern Medicine of Australia (September):58-
             71.
Lachs, M.S., et al.
    1998     The mortality of elder mistreatment. Journal of the American Medical Associa-
             tion 280:428-432.
National Center on Elder Abuse
    1998     National Elder Abuse Incidence Study: Final Report. Washington, DC: Ameri-
             can Public Human Services Association in collaboration with Westat, Inc.
National Research Council and Institute of Medicine
    1998     Violence in Families: Assessing Prevention and Treatment Programs. Committee
             on the Assessment of Family Violence Interventions. R. Chalk, and P.A. King,
             eds. Washington DC: National Academy Press.
Ogg, J., and G.C.J. Bennett
    1992     Elder abuse in Britain. British Medical Journal 305:998-999.
Phillips, L.
    1986     Theoretical explanations of elder abuse: Competing hypotheses and unresolved
             issues. In Elder Abuse: Conflict in the Family, Rosalie Wolf and Karl Pillemer,
             eds. Dover, MA: Auburn House.
Pillemer K., and D. Finkelhor
    1988     The prevalence of elder abuse: A random sample survey. Gerontologist 28:51-
             57.
Podnieks, E.
    1992     National survey on abuse of the elderly in Canada. Journal of Elder Abuse and
             Neglect 41(1/2):5-58.
Reis, M., and D. Nahmiash
    1998     Validation of the Indicators of Abuse (IOA) Screen. The Gerontologist, 38(4):
             471-480.
248                                                           ELDER MISTREATMENT

U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
   1966    Four Model Demonstration Projects: Services to Older Adults in the Public Wel-
           fare Program. State Letter No. 925. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
           Health, Education, and Welfare.
U.S. House of Representatives, Select Committee on Aging
   1979    Elder Abuse: The Hidden Problem. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
           Office.
U.S. House of Representatives, Subcommittee of Domestic and International Scientific Plan-
ning, Analysis, and Cooperation
   1978    Hearings of the Committee on Science and Technology. 14 February to 16
           February, 1978. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
                               APPENDIX
                                     D

                  Biographical Sketches




Richard J. Bonnie (Chair) is John S. Battle professor of law at the University
of Virginia School of Law and director of the University’s Institute of Law,
Psychiatry, and Public Policy. He writes and teaches in the fields of crimi-
nal law and procedure, mental health law, bioethics, and public health law.
He has been deeply interested in issues involving psychiatry and human
rights. In 1991, he was elected to the Institute of Medicine (IOM) and he
has been an active participant in the National Academies’ work. He serves
or has served on the IOM Board on Neuroscience and Behavioral Health,
the IOM Committee to Assess the Science Base for Tobacco Harm Reduc-
tion, the National Research Council’s Committee on Data and Research for
Policy on Illegal Drugs, and the IOM Committee to Assess the System for
Protection of Human Research Subjects. He chaired the IOM Committee
on Injury Prevention and Control, the IOM Committee on Opportunities in
Drug Abuse Research, and was vice-chair of the IOM Committee on Pre-
venting Nicotine Dependence in Children and Youths. He is a fellow of the
Virginia Law Foundation, a charter fellow of the College on the Problems
of Drug Dependence, and is on the board of directors of the college. He
received the American Psychiatric Association’s Isaac Ray award in 1998
for contributions to forensic psychiatry and the psychiatric aspects of juris-
prudence. He has a B.A. (1966) from Johns Hopkins University and a J.D.
(1969) from the University of Virginia.

Terry Fulmer is co-director of the John A. Hartford Foundation Institute
for Geriatric Nursing, Division of Nursing, at New York University. She is

                                    249
250                                                  ELDER MISTREATMENT

also professor of nursing at New York University’s Division of Nursing and
president of the Eastern Nursing Research Society. Her research focuses on
acute care of the elderly, specifically on the subject of elder abuse and
neglect. Her work on dyadic vulnerability/risk profiling for elder neglect is
funded by the National Institute on Aging in partnership with the National
Institute of Nursing Research. Her books include Inadequate Care of the
Elderly: Health Care Perspective on Abuse and Neglect and Critical Nurs-
ing Care of the Elderly. Two of her books have received the American
Journal of Nursing book of the year award. She is a fellow of the American
Academy of Nursing, a fellow of the Gerontological Society of America and
the New York Academy of Medicine, and distinguished practitioner of the
National Academies of Practice. She completed a Brookdale fellowship and
is a distinguished practitioner of the National Academies of Medicine. She
was honored by the New York State Nurses Association with the distin-
guished nurse researcher award. She has chaired the clinical medicine
section of the Gerontological Society of America and has been on the
congress of nursing economics for the American Nurses Association. She
has an undergraduate degree from Skidmore College and M.A. and Ph.D.
degrees from Boston College.

Marisa A. Gerstein is a research assistant for the Committee on National
Statistics and has worked on several of its panels, including the Panel to
Review the 2000 Census, the Panel on Formula Allocations, and the Panel
on Methods for Assessing Discrimination. She came to the Committee
from Burch Munford Direct, a direct-mail company, and previously worked
for the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League. She has
a B.A. in sociology from New College of Florida (1999).

Lora Flattum Hamp is a fellow of the Borchard Foundation Center on Law
and Aging at the University of Georgia School of Law. Previously, she
worked as an assistant director of an area agency on aging and served on
the board of the Virginia Association on Aging. She has conducted research
on state statutes governing elder abuse and studied factors contributing to
the unmet legal needs of the elderly. She assisted in drafting the National
Handbook on Laws and Programs Affecting Senior Citizens and was
awarded the title of Virginia’s Ambassador for the Aging by the Virginia
Department for the Aging. Hamp has a B.S. in chemistry from the College
of William and Mary, an M.S. in gerontology from the Medical College of
Virginia, and a J.D. from the University of Virginia School of Law.

Richard A. Kulka is senior research vice president of statistics, health, and
social policy at the Research Triangle Institute in Research Triangle Park,
NC. Previously, he was senior vice president for survey research at the
APPENDIX D                                                               251

National Opinion Research Center. He has been involved in the design,
conduct, and analysis of numerous statistical surveys on health, mental
health, and other social policy issues for over two decades, while also
conducting a broad range of applied research on survey research methods
in these areas. Kulka is a member of several professional associations,
including the American Statistical Association, the American Association
for Public Opinion Research, and the American Public Health Association.
He has a Ph.D. in social psychology from the University of Michigan.

Eva Kutas is the director of the Office of Investigations and Training of the
Oregon Department of Human Resources, which is the adult protective
services agency that responds to all allegations of abuse and neglect of
people with mental illness or developmental disabilities in Oregon. The
office also provides training about abuse and neglect to providers and
clients, mandatory abuse reporters, and the public. She has criminal and
civil law experience and worked at the Oregon Advocacy Center (Oregon’s
protection and advocacy agency for people with disabilities) for 10 years as
an advocate. She has conducted approximately 600 investigations over 15
years, specializing in complex cases and unusual or questionable deaths.
She has also lectured extensively on the subject of interviewing people with
disabilities who are victims of abuse or neglect. She is the current president
of the National Association of Adult Protective Services Administrators, an
organization that strives to improve the quality and availability of services
to vulnerable adults who are abused, neglected, and exploited, to promote
advocacy, training, and research in the field and to educate the public and
government leaders on behalf of this population. She received her B.A. and
M.S. from the University of Oregon, and her J.D. from Northwestern School
of Law of Lewis and Clark College.

Edward O. Laumann is the George Herbert Mead distinguished service
professor in the Department of Sociology and the College at the University
of Chicago, chairman of the Department of Sociology, and director of the
Ogburn Stouffer Center for Population and Social Organization. Previ-
ously he was editor of the American Journal of Sociology, dean of the
Social Sciences Division, and provost (chief academic officer) at the univer-
sity. Before coming to Chicago, he taught at the University of Michigan.
Laumann’s research interests include social stratification, the sociology of
the professions, occupations, and formal organizations, social network
analysis, the analysis of elite groups and national policy making, and the
sociology of human sexuality. Among his published books are three vol-
umes on human sexuality: The Social Organization of Sexuality, Sex in
America, and Sex, Love and Health in America. He is vice president of the
board of trustees of the National Opinion Research Center, a fellow of the
252                                                  ELDER MISTREATMENT

American Association for the Advancement of Science, a fellow of the
Society for the Scientific Study of Sexuality, an associate director of the
Center for Clinical Medical Ethics at the Pritzker School of Medicine, a
member of the board of directors of the Metropolitan Chicago Informa-
tion Center, current chair of the section on economic and political sciences
of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, a former
member of the University of Chicago board of governors for the Argonne
National Laboratory, and a former member of the board of trustees of the
University of Chicago Hospitals. He has a B.A. from Oberlin College
(1960) and M.A. (1962) and Ph.D. (1964) degrees from Harvard Univer-
sity.

Tanya M. Lee is a project assistant for the Committee on National Statis-
tics. Before joining the staff in September 2001, she worked for the Insti-
tute of Medicine’s Committee on Strategies for Small Number Participants
Clinical Research Trails and the Committee on Creating a Vision for Space
Medicine during Travel Beyond Earth Orbit. She has been with the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences since April 2000. She attended the University
of Maryland, Eastern Shore, and Prince Georges Community College, pur-
suing a degree in sociology.

Constantine G. Lyketsos is a board-certified geriatric psychiatrist who di-
rects the Johns Hopkins Neuropsychiatry Service and the Comprehensive
Alzheimer Program. He is an active clinician with an expertise in dementia
and Alzheimer’s disease. With Peter Rabins and Cindy Steele he authored
Practical Dementia Care and has contributed numerous publications to the
international scientific literature on dementia, geriatrics, depression, neu-
ropsychiatry, Alzheimer’s disease, and HIV/AIDS. His ongoing research
focuses on the impact and treatment of psychiatric disturbances in
Alzheimer’s disease, its diagnosis and prevention, the epidemiology of cog-
nitive decline and dementia, and on the care of persons with dementia. He
has special expertise in the design and conduct of clinical epidemiological
and intervention studies. He was recently cited in Best Doctors in America.
He has a B.A. from Northwestern University, an M.D. from Washington
University in St. Louis, and an M.H.S. from Johns Hopkins School of
Public Health with a focus on clinical epidemiology.

Gary B. Melton is professor of psychology and director of the Institute on
Family and Neighborhood Life at Clemson University. A past president of
the American Psychology-Law Society and the American Psychological As-
sociation (APA) Division of Child, Youth, and Family Services, he has
received awards for distinguished scholarship in the public interest from
APA itself (twice), two of its divisions, the American Psychological Founda-
APPENDIX D                                                                253

tion, Psi Chi, and Prevent Child Abuse America. He has written or edited
numerous scholarly publications, and his work has been cited by U.S. courts
at all levels. He has consulted, lectured, or conducted research in 24
countries and territories abroad, and he is nearing completion of two three-
year terms as president of Childwatch International, a global network of
child research centers. He received his B.A. from the University of Virginia,
and his M.A. and a PhD in clinical-community psychology from Boston
University.

Laura Mosqueda is director of geriatrics and associate clinical professor of
family medicine at the Irvine College of Medicine, University of California,
Irvine. She also is an associate clinical professor in family medicine at the
college. She is the principal investigator of a 3-year project to create,
implement, and evaluate an interdisciplinary elder abuse medical response
team. This team works closely with adult protective services, law enforce-
ment, and the district attorney’s office in addressing the abuse and neglect
of older adults and adults with disabilities. She also serves as the co-
director of the Rehabilitation Research and Training Center on Aging with
a Disability at Rancho Los Amigos National Rehabilitation Center. Previ-
ously she served as the co-chief of the Elder Abuse Domain of the California
Medical Training Center, where she was responsible for creating and imple-
menting courses designed to train physicians and health care professionals
in the medical forensic aspects of elder abuse. She has an M.D. from the
University of Southern California School of Medicine.

Gregory Paveza is currently professor in the School of Social Work and one
of the founding faculty in the interdisciplinary Aging Studies Program at the
University of South Florida. He has been a clinical social work practitioner,
a social service agency administrator, and a health sciences researcher. His
research deals with issues related to the social consequences of caregiving
and Alzheimer’s disease, including a specific interest in elder mistreatment
in these families. He also has a general interest in elder mistreatment and its
impact on the broader aging community. He is a member of the Institute of
Medicine’s Committee on the Training Needs of Health Professionals to
Respond to Family Violence and a member of the Leadership Council of the
Mental Health and Aging Network of the American Society on Aging. He
has published extensively on issues related to geriatric assessment, the
caregiving consequences of Alzheimer’s disease, including the cost of pro-
viding community-based care, and elder mistreatment. He has a B.A. from
Lewis College (1969), an M.S.W. from the University of Hawaii (1973),
and a Ph.D. in public health sciences (psychiatric epidemiology, 1986) from
the School of Public Health at the University of Illinois at Chicago.
254                                                  ELDER MISTREATMENT

Karl Pillemer is professor of human development and director of the Cornell
Gerontology Research Institute at Cornell University. His interests center
on human development over the life course, with a special emphasis on
family and social relationships in middle age and beyond. His research,
funded over the past 10 years by the National Institutes of Health, involves
family members who provide care to Alzheimer’s disease victims, examin-
ing the relationships among social network structure, social support, and
psychological well-being. A second major interest is in intergenerational
relations in later life, with a focus on determinants and consequences of the
quality of adult child-parent relationships (including international com-
parative work on this topic). Over the past two decades, Pillemer has
conducted a long-term program of research on conflict and abuse in fami-
lies of the aged, including several related studies of the domestic abuse of
elderly persons. These have included large-scale prevalence surveys in the
United States and Canada, evaluations of abuse prevention and treatment
programs, and longitudinal research that examines the health consequences
of maltreatment. Pillemer has also conducted several studies of abuse in
long-term care facilities. He has a Ph.D. in sociology from Brandeis Univer-
sity.

Earl S. Pollack is a member of the staff of the Committee on National
Statistics and served as study director for this panel. Previously, he was
chief of biometry at the National Cancer Institute and director of the Divi-
sion of Biometry and Epidemiology at the National Institute of Mental
Health. More recently, he was research professor at the Biostatistics Cen-
ter, George Washington University, and served as statistician for the Center
to Protect Workers Rights, the construction research arm of the AFL/CIO.
His interests are in chronic disease epidemiology and the analysis of obser-
vational data from large health and medical databases. He is a fellow of the
American Statistical Association, the American College of Epidemiology,
and the American Public Health Association. He has B.S. and M.A. degrees
in statistics from the University of Minnesota and an Sc.D. in biostatistics
from Harvard University.

Lori A. Stiegel is associate staff director of the American Bar Association’s
Commission on Legal Problems of the Elderly in Washington, DC. She is
currently directing three projects on elder abuse and older battered women
with funding from the U.S. Department of Justice, as well as the
commission’s activities in its role as a partner in the National Center on
Elder Abuse funded by the U.S. Administration on Aging. She serves on the
board of directors of the National Committee for the Prevention of Elder
Abuse and is the author of Elder Abuse in the State Courts: Three Curricu-
lar Judges and Court Staff and Recommended Guidelines for State Courts
APPENDIX D                                                               255

Handling Cases Involving Elder Abuse. She has a B.A. from the University
of Florida, and a J.D. from George Washington University National Law
Center.

Robert B. Wallace is professor of epidemiology and internal medicine at the
University of Iowa’s College of Public Health and Medicine and interim
director of the university’s Center on Aging. He has been a member of the
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force and is now a senior adviser to it, and
was also a member of the National Advisory Council on Aging of the
National Institutes of Health. He is currently chair of the Board on Health
Promotion and Disease Prevention of the Institute of Medicine. He served
on the executive committee of the Association of Teachers of Preventive
Medicine and was chair of the epidemiology section of the American Public
Health Association. He is the author or coauthor of numerous publications
and book chapters and has been the editor of four books, including the
current edition of Public Health and Preventive Medicine. His research
interests concern the causes and prevention of disabling conditions of older
persons. He has had substantial experience in the conduct of both observa-
tional cohort studies of older persons and clinical trials, including preven-
tive interventions related to osteoporotic fracture and coronary disease
prevention. He is the site principal investigator for the Women’s Health
Initiative (WHI), a national intervention trial exploring the prevention of
breast and colon cancer and coronary disease. He has been a collaborator
in several international studies of the prevention of chronic illness in older
persons. He has a B.S.M in medicine (1964) and an M.D. (1967) from
Northwestern University and an M.Sc. in epidemiology from the State
University of New York, Buffalo (1972).


                       OTHER CONTRIBUTORS
Ronald Acierno is assistant professor of psychiatry at the National Crime
Victims Research and Treatment Center of the Medical University of South
Carolina. He specializes in the assessment and treatment of psychopathol-
ogy in older adults who have been victims of assault, abuse, neglect, and
exploitation. He has a B.A. (with distinction) in psychology from the
University of Virginia (1989) and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in clinical psy-
chology from Nova-Southeastern University (1996).

Marie-Therese Connolly, a senior trial counsel in the Civil Division of the
U.S. Department of Justice, coordinates its Nursing Home Initiative and
elder justice activities. In that capacity, she coordinates the department’s
internal efforts and works with federal, state, and local entities (and in
particular with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services), aca-
256                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

demics, advocates, providers, and others on nursing home and elder-related
issues and cases. She has a B.A. from Stanford University, and her J.D.
from Northeastern University School of Law.

Rebecca Susan Dresser is Daniel Noyes Kirby professor of law at the Wash-
ington University School of Law. She has written extensively on legal and
ethical issues in the progression of dementia, the end of life, and informed
consent, among other areas. She has a B.A. in psychology and sociology
(1973) and an M.S. in education (1975) from Indiana University,
Bloomington, and a J.D. from Harvard Law School (1979).

Carmel Bitondo Dyer is associate professor of medicine at Baylor College
of Medicine as well as co-director and founder of the Texas Elder Abuse
and Mistreatment Institute established in 1997. Her clinical interests in-
clude care of the elderly poor, elder mistreatment, dementia, delirium, de-
pression, and geriatric assessment. She is board certified in internal medi-
cine and geriatrics and has been the director of the geriatrics program at the
Harris County Hospital District since completing her postgraduate training
in 1993. She has an M.D. from Baylor College of Medicine (1988).

Thomas L. Hafemeister is the director of legal studies at the Institute of
Law, Psychiatry, and Public Policy of the University of Virginia. He is also
an instructor at the University of Virginia Law School and an associate
professor of medical education in the Department of Psychiatric Medicine
at the University of Virginia Medical School. He has conducted research on
a wide range of topics, including end-of-life decision making, guardianship
and conservatorship proceedings, public health law and the public health
system, and tort law in the health care system. He has a J.D. from the
University of Nebraska Law School (1982) and a Ph.D. in social psychol-
ogy (1988) from the University of Nebraska as part of a joint J.D./Ph.D.
degree program.

Catherine Hawes is professor in the Department of Health Policy and
Management, School of Rural Public Health, at the Texas A&M
University’s Health Science Center. She is also director of the Southwest
Rural Health Research Center, one of six federally funded rural health
research centers nationwide. She has been active in research, teaching, and
policy making in long-term care for more than 25 years. She has a B.A.
from Principia College and a Ph.D. from the University of Texas at Austin.

Patricia J. McFeeley is assistant chief medical investigator for the state of
New Mexico. She is certified in anatomic and forensic pathology by the
American Board of Pathology. She has an undergraduate degree from Ohio
APPENDIX D                                                              257

Wesleyan University and an M.D. from the University of New Mexico
School of Medicine.

Rosalie S. Wolf was executive director of the Institute on Aging at UMass
Memorial Health Care, the clinical partner of the University of Massachu-
setts Medical School, and assistant professor of family medicine and com-
munity health. She passed away in fall 2001. A major portion of her time
in the past two decades was devoted to the study of elder abuse in domestic
settings. With Karl A. Pillemer, she co-edited Elder Abuse: Conflict in the
Family and co-authored Helping Elderly Victims: The Reality of Elder
Abuse. She had a B.S. from the University of Wisconsin and a Ph.D. in
social welfare policy with a concentration in aging from the Florence Heller
Graduate School at Brandeis University.

David Wolfe is professor of psychology and psychiatry at the University of
Western Ontario and director of the Center for Research on Violence
Against Women and Children. He has broad research and clinical interests
in abnormal child psychology, with a special focus on child abuse, domestic
violence, and developmental psychopathology. He has a B.A. in psychol-
ogy from University of Rochester (1973) and an M.A. in psychology (1978)
and a Ph.D. in clinical psychology (1980) from the University of South
Florida.
     Part II
Background Papers
                          10
                  Elder Mistreatment:
              Epidemiological Assessment
                     Methodology
                             Ron Acierno, Ph.D.*




                          E  pidemiological data on elder mistreatment can
be obtained through (1) agency record review, (2) sentinel reports (trained
observers in agencies that serve older adults but do not document abuse in
official adult protective service [APS] records), (3) translation of criminal
justice statistics using age and perpetrator data fields, (4) caretaker/family
member interviews (in person or via telephone), and (5) interviews of eld-
erly respondents themselves (in person or via telephone). Each of these
assessment formats has been used with older adults, either in isolation or in
combination with other methods to generate population estimates of physi-
cal, sexual, or emotional abuse, neglect, and financial exploitation. These
mistreatment categories are typically divided according to perpetrator iden-
tity as either familial/spousal abuse or caretaker abuse. A final category of
stranger abuse (i.e., stranger assault: physical, sexual, or emotional) may
arguably be included under the heading elder mistreatment (with the caveat
that risk factors will probably be different) because (a) psychological and
health effects are similar to those caused by abuse by family members; (b) a
significant proportion of elder mistreatment, particularly in the area of
financial exploitation, is perpetrated by strangers; and (c) failure to assess
similarly assaultive behaviors by strangers ignores potential mediating fac-
tors that might interact with familial abuse to predict medical health and
mental health outcome.


 *Ron Acierno, Ph.D., is an assistant professor of psychiatry at the National Crime Victims
Research and Treatment Center of the Medical University of South Carolina.

                                           261
262                                                           ELDER MISTREATMENT

     Another assessment issue of considerable importance that has not re-
ceived sufficient attention, at least insofar as elder abuse is concerned, is the
categorization of elder mistreatment along lines of cognitive impairment.
Although the same behavior of physical abuse might be manifest against
two individuals, one demented and the other nondemented, by the same
class of perpetrator, the optimal method of assessing these two events may
vary widely. Research to date has not thoroughly considered cognitive
status as the major parameter determining relevance of assessment method-
ology. Rather, as mentioned above, assessment of elder mistreatment has
been divided into abuse versus assault studies according to perpetrator
identity. This is problematic in that researchers attempting to document
the extent and rate of elder abuse (irrespective of cognitive status) have
adopted methodologies that are better suited for one class or the other of
older adults. That is, methods 1, agency record review, and 2, sentinel
reports, may be effective in assessing abuse against cognitively impaired
elders, whereas they will not be very effective in assessing abuse against
nonimpaired elders, who may actually avoid these individuals and agencies.
Similarly, method 5, anonymous older adult assessment, is probably pre-
ferred when cognitive status is intact but is precluded in instances of demen-
tia. Method 4, caretaker assessment, walks the line between these two, in
that its effectiveness is not determined by an elder’s cognitive status and
may therefore be an appropriate stopgap or supplemental technique (see
Pillemer and Finkelhor, 1988). However, this method is less statistically
sensitive than respondent interviews (i.e., when cognitive status is intact)
and probably should not be relied on exclusively.
     A distinction based on the mistreated elder’s cognitive status is concep-
tually, as well as methodologically, important in that the social context of
abuse or assault of nondemented older adults by family members appears
to more closely resemble domestic violence, whereas the social context of
abuse of cognitively impaired older adults appears to be more akin to child
abuse. This is particularly the case when one considers the nature of the
relationship between violence perpetrators and recipients (Finkelhor and
Pillemer, 1988; Utech and Garrett, 1992;Whittaker, 1996). Thus, violence
between two individuals of equal or near-equal societal status, and of equal
or near-equal cognitive development, describes both domestic violence and
abuse of noncognitively impaired elders (Finkelhor and Pillemer, 1988). By
contrast, violence between individuals of varied social status and depen-
dency resulting from differences in cognitive functioning or independence
(due to either dementia or lack of development) describes both child abuse
and abuse of cognitively impaired elders.1


  1Additional justification for this conceptual distinction is provided by empirical,
sociopolitical, and legal sources. For example, epidemiological data demonstrate that most
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                                       263

     This conceptual distinction becomes even more important when con-
sidering that risk factors for violence against older adults probably vary as
a function of cognitive status. Hence primary prevention strategies for
abuse of cognitively impaired elders will differ from those for abuse of
unimpaired elders, just as strategies to prevent child abuse differ from those
used to prevent domestic violence.
     Thus, cognitive status of the respondent is pragmatically important in
that it will determine the risk factors and intervention strategies most useful
and important for a particular class of individuals. Cognitive status of the
respondent is methodologically and conceptually important in that it will
largely determine which assessment strategies from the domestic violence
field and from the child abuse field, both of which are more developed than
those of the elder mistreatment field, may be applied to older adults. The
appropriateness of this application will vary in terms of the cognitive status
of the respondent in that an assessment strategy that does not rely on victim
report (which will be significantly affected by cognitive status) is indicated
in cases of abuse of young children and cognitively impaired older adults.
The National Elder Abuse Incidence Study methodology, for example, is
appropriate in these instances. By contrast, methods involving some degree
of self-report will be indicated in instances where cognitive impairment is
not severe. These methods are described at length below.




elder abuse is in fact spouse abuse, leading Pillemer and Finkelhor (1988) to state: “In the
past, elder abuse was described primarily in analogy with child abuse. The present study
suggests that elder abuse has much more in common with spouse abuse than child abuse” (p.
55). Utech and Garrett (1992) go even further, writing, “ . . . such parallels with child abuse
have had an unfortunate impact on the study of elder abuse, including a tunnel vision effect,
which precludes a comprehensive analysis of the problem” (p. 419). Considering sociopolitical
factors, investigators have warned against the dangers of infantilizing the older adult victim,
as illustrated by Finkelhor and Pillemer (1988): “much elder abuse does not conform to the
child abuse model, and elder abuse victims are not necessarily in a structural relationship to
their abusers parallel to that of children. . . . We argue that it may be useful to start examining
elder abuse for more parallels with the spouse abuse situation: legally independent adults,
living together out of choice for a variety of emotional and material reasons” (see also
Whittaker, 1996). Finally, legal support for the conceptualization of mistreatment of non-
cognitively impaired elders as spouse abuse, rather than child abuse, is provided by the fact
that a debate is currently underway regarding mandatory reporting of mistreatment of unim-
paired elders (the same debate is underway across the nation with respect to domestic vio-
lence), whereas no such debate exists with respect to mandatory reporting mistreatment of
cognitively impaired elders (see Daniels, Baumhover, and Clark-Daniels, 1989; Gordon and
Tomita, 1990; Macolini, 1995).
264                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

        ISSUES RELEVANT TO ASSESSMENT OF VIOLENCE
                   AGAINST OLDER ADULTS
      There are two major points to consider when interviewing older adults,
relative to younger adults. First, older adults are frequently more reluctant
to disclose psychological and interpersonal problems of the past or present.
Second, their verbal reports are more affected by physical factors (e.g.,
fatigue, hearing difficulty) (Ouslander, 1984; Patterson and Dupree, 1994).
With respect to the first point, older adults may actually be less likely to
disclose abuse than are their abusers (see Homer and Gilleard, 1990,
Pillemer and Finkelhor, 1988). Older adults who have been abused or
assaulted by family members may be unlikely to report these events for a
variety of reasons. Among hypothesized explanations that require further
study is the supposition that older adults feel responsible, at least in part,
for their children’s abusive behavior because they “taught them to be that
way.” That is, they blame their own parenting style for their adult child’s
behavior. Another hypothesized explanation is that older adults may also
feel extremely embarrassed that their offspring or spouses are abusing them
and that they are powerless to stop the abuse. They may be very motivated
to hide this powerlessness, both out of pride, and in order to deny any
physical or cognitive declines associated with aging. Older and younger
adults also report that simply being stigmatized or labeled as a victim is
aversive, particularly in instances of sexual assault (Kilpatrick et al., 1992).
As with younger victims of domestic violence, abused older adults may fear
retribution or more intense assaultiveness from the perpetrator or other
abusive parties. Financially or physically dependent older adults also face
the very real fear that if the perpetrator is arrested or removed from the
household following disclosure, they may be institutionalized or lose other
freedoms. Indeed, adults of all ages who have never made or experienced a
report of abuse probably do not have information about resources or out-
comes of reporting abuse and hence may deny any query, considering truth-
ful responses as potentially damaging but not potentially helpful. Finally,
older adult victims may care deeply for or love the perpetrator and may try
to avoid hurting or embarrassing the perpetrator in any way through dis-
closure to epidemiological researchers or authorities.
      Physical health barriers to reporting victimization events include defi-
cits in cognitive functioning, hearing loss, increased susceptibility to fa-
tigue, inability to remain sitting for extended durations (e.g., due to arthri-
tis), and effects of medication on concentration and memory. Other factors
to consider when assessing older adults include ageism, interview stress,
increased somatic presentations that may mirror psychopathological symp-
toms, increased time needed to build trust and rapport, and increased medi-
cation use. Ageism refers to “a personal revulsion to, and distaste for,
growing old, and a fear of powerlessness, uselessness, and death” (Patterson
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                      265

and Dupree, 1994:374). Not only must assessors be trained to avoid ageist
thinking or actions, but the assessment instrument itself must not be ageist
in tone or content. Focusing on specific behaviors and events during assess-
ment (e.g., using very clear, specific descriptions of behavioral events, rather
than culturally or generationally defined phrases) appears to be an objective
means by which to limit ageism, and, as illustrated below, is an important
methodological strategy to increase sensitivity and accuracy of victimiza-
tion assessment (Patterson and Dupree, 1994).
     In addition, it is important to conduct some assessment of cognitive
functioning in order to determine the best form of violence assessment, and
whether or not assessment of the older adult is even appropriate. Greater
susceptibility to fatigue and concentration problems related to disclosure of
highly personal content make it advantageous to limit stress during inter-
views (Gurland et al., 1978). This is particularly the case when interview
disclosures potentially affect the interviewee’s life, or at least such potential
impact is perceived (e.g., disclosing abuse, which then might be reported,
leading to social service intervention).


              ASSESSMENT OF ELDER MISTREATMENT:
                EXISTING METHODS AND MEASURES
     The following review summarizes specific measures of elder mistreat-
ment and their advantages and disadvantages. Measures are categorized in
terms of the five forms of elder mistreatment assessment methodology out-
lined above. In general, factors such as feasibility, sensitivity, reliability,
validity, and cost guide overall conclusions and recommendations for each
strategy and measure.


                           Agency Record Review
     Agency records provide a readily available source of information re-
garding investigated and substantiated cases of elder abuse, neglect, and
exploitation. These data are not collected for the purpose of epidemiologi-
cal or preventive research, however, and the specific information is not
always exactly what a particular researcher desires. Moreover, the criteria
by which cases are designated substantiated or not and the definitions for
particular forms of elder mistreatment vary widely across social service
agency, county, and state.
     The National Center on Elder Abuse (Tatara, 1997) collects and com-
piles into reports nationwide data from those social service agencies charged
with protecting the health and welfare of older adults. Thus, these reports
describe actual investigated and indicated cases of abuse and neglect in
which family members were interviewed, households were visited, and in-
266                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

spections were conducted. Although the rate of reported cases has been
increasing each year, the sensitivity of this method is extremely low because
most cases of elder mistreatment are not reported to any social service
authorities (Pillemer and Finkelhor [1988] found only 7 percent of cases
reported to authorities), and those incidents that are reported must be
judged as valid to be considered substantiated. Again, the criteria by which
a report is considered founded vary widely by center, as do the definitions
of abuse. Ultimately, it is the judgment of individual caseworkers that
determines whether or not a mistreatment event has occurred.
     A notable strength of agency record review studies such as that con-
ducted by the National Center on Elder Abuse is the highly detailed nature
of the data regarding the abuse event. Specifically, the context of elder
mistreatment, the perpetrator characteristics, demographic variables, and
social structures are usually specified and documented somewhere in agency
records. Moreover, there is a relatively strong level of confidence that
indicated cases did, in fact, occur. Relative to epidemiological surveys that
are conducted solely for data collection and analysis (as opposed to service
delivery), information from agency records exists independent of research
protocols and is therefore relatively inexpensive to transfer to the research
realm.
     By contrast, several significant weaknesses characterize agency record-
based investigations. This method requires collecting data from a wide
variety of agencies that may use dissimilar definitions of mistreatment.
Even more problematic is that individual agencies vary widely in the re-
sources directed to investigation of cases, training of caseworkers, and
follow-up and substantiation of cases. Thus, even when standard defini-
tions and criteria are used, the means by which agencies determine whether
an event meets these criteria will differ. As such, sensitivity and reliability
of findings will suffer. The utility of this approach for epidemiological
researchers is further affected by the quality of agency record maintenance,
accessibility to records, accessibility of the agency personnel, and overall
quality of record keeping by an agency.
     Overall, the agency record review methodology is indicated when the
population of older adults suffers from cognitive impairment and cannot
otherwise be interviewed. However, this method is less sensitive than in
other methods applicable to cognitively impaired populations and should
probably be used only to guide initial efforts insofar as gross approxima-
tions of elder mistreatment are needed.


                              Sentinel Reports
   The National Elder Abuse Incidence Study (NEAIS) sponsored by the
Administration for Children and Families and the Administration on Aging
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                    267

expanded its data sources from APS reports to include trained sentinel
reports of substantiated or presumed substantiated cases. The NEAIS-
targeted people living in their own homes, age 60 and above. This was an
incidence study (new cases during a set time frame), not a prevalence study.
Importantly, this study did not interview older adults themselves. Sentinels
were professionals who served older adults and were randomly selected
from more than 200 agencies. Sentinels were trained to complete data
entry forms identical to those used by APS workers for elder abuse. The
logic of the sentinel approach is based on the supposition that sentinels
enhance sensitivity by detecting those older adult victims of abuse who are
nonreporters or are not involved with APS but who nonetheless interact in
some way with community-based service agencies. NEAIS data were gath-
ered on domestic (i.e., noninstitutionalized) elder abuse and neglect cases
from a nationally representative sample of 20 counties in 15 states. Reports
from APS agencies were considered only when substantiated and reports
from sentinels were presumed to be substantiated.
     The methodology of combining agency record reviews with sentinel
reports to detect mistreatment has previously demonstrated success in three
studies of child abuse. Moreover, the method is cost-effective, and identi-
fied cases are very likely true positives. Multiple data sources are consulted,
and these typically have a very thorough familiarity with cases. Finally,
multiple forms of mistreatment are identifiable.
     Weaknesses of this method include the fact that no direct assessment is
made of the population in question. Thus, it is very likely that mistreat-
ment rates derived from this study greatly underestimate the true scope of
the problem of elder victimization because a great majority of cases go both
unreported and undetected by existing formal and informal monitoring
agents. Although this approach has been used three times with child abuse,
there are several problems with this method when applied to elder abuse.
First, and perhaps most relevant, is the fact that child abuse reporting
statutes and subsequent education of an extremely wide range of service
providers (e.g., schoolteachers, doctors, nurses, counselors, day-care work-
ers, etc.) regarding these statutes is formally established and mature. That
is, awareness of the problem of child abuse is far greater among the general
and professional public, and thus sentinels in the child arena will be more
familiar with the problem and its symptoms. Moreover, child abuse man-
datory reporting and provisions for anonymous voluntary reporting have
been in place nationwide and have been accompanied by national educa-
tion campaigns. As such, it is likely that child protective services receive a
significantly larger proportion of existing cases than APS. Indeed, manda-
tory reporting of elder abuse is not consistent across the nation and is still
actively debated. National education campaigns for the general public and
for health and social service providers on child abuse also increase the
268                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

likelihood that noncompelled reporters will approach sentinels for child
abuse, relative to elder abuse. Thus, sentinels for child abuse have access to
greater conduits of information than their older adult counterparts.
     Overall, the unresolved issue of mandatory reporting of elder abuse,
the relative infancy of elder abuse public education, and the limited con-
duits of information on elder abuse cases flowing to potential sentinels may
severely limit the application of this form of child abuse assessment to elder
mistreatment in that the method may lack sensitivity. This lack of sensitiv-
ity will be particularly problematic for the population of non-cognitively
impaired, relatively independent mistreated older adults who wish to avoid
formal service agency involvement in their abuse situations.


               Criminal Justice System Statistics Translation
     There are several sources of victim statistics describing rates of violent
crime in this country (e.g., National Crime Victimization Survey [NCVS],
Federal Bureau of Investigation [FBI] Uniform Crime Reports [UCR], FBI
National Incident Based Reporting System [NIBRS]). Official police or
government estimates of assaultive violence are typically lower than those
obtained by social scientists conducting epidemiological research. These
differences are largely attributable to methodological variance across sur-
veys (e.g., use of gateway versus behaviorally specific preliminary screening
questions, or aggregation of official police reports versus population sur-
veys, see discussion of this below). This variance is informative: failure to
use direct, behavioral questions leads to failed case identification.
     The FBI’s UCR is a frequently cited index of violent crime that has been
reported to police. The UCR is a case-based report, in which the worst FBI
index crime (murder, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny,
motor vehicle theft, arson) reported by an individual is the only one that is
recorded for that individual. However, since many crimes are not reported
to police, and because many individuals are multiply victimized, UCR re-
sults are somewhat misleading.
     The Bureau of Justice Statistics overcomes this weakness in its annual
NCVS of approximately 80,000 to 100,000 adults aged 12 years and older
from approximately 45,000 households. Randomly contacted U.S. citizens
are asked about both reported and unreported victimization experiences.
In 1992, older adults (age 65 years and older) comprised 14 percent of
survey respondents (Bachman, 1992). According to the NCVS, adults over
age 50 were the least likely to be physically or sexually assaulted, with an
annual violent crime rate of 12.5 per 1,000. However, once assaulted, older
adults were more than twice as likely to be seriously injured and require
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                   269

hospitalization following crime. Fully half of older injured victims, com-
pared to about 25 percent of younger injured victims, required hospitaliza-
tion. Moreover, elderly victims were more likely than younger victims to be
assaulted or robbed by a stranger and were more likely to be victimized in
or around their home. Half of elderly victims, compared to 26 percent of
those under 65, experienced violence in or around their homes and were
more likely than younger adults to face offenders armed with a gun
(Bachman, 1992). Elderly men were at greater risk of violent crime than
elderly women. Low income, minority racial status, and geography also
contributed to increased risk of assault (Bachman, 1992). For example,
African American older adults were victimized at twice the rate of Cauca-
sian elderly, and older adults living in urban settings were three times as
likely to experience crime.
     McCabe and Gregory (1998) used the FBI’s NIBRS to assess crime
against the elderly. This system differs from the UCR in that each incident,
not only the worst incident, of crime is recorded. Moreover, like the
NCVS, the NIBRS includes information on the perpetrator’s relationship to
the victim, permitting assessment of abuse versus assault rates. The NIBRS
also includes demographic and gender information, providing some ability
to conduct risk-factor research. Finally, the NIBRS differs from the UCR in
that additional, nonindex crimes are also covered. Unfortunately, only
crime reported to police is included in these records.
     An advantage of using criminal justice system (CJS) statistics is its
nationwide data collection frame. That is, many CJS studies are actual
population derivations, not sample estimates. In addition, information on
reported (to police) crime includes data regarding gender, race, and perpe-
trator status. Moreover, older adults are more likely to report some forms
of crime to police than younger adults, increasing the relative validity of
published rates of reported crime. However, crimes of abuse and neglect
are less likely to be reported, mitigating this advantage somewhat.
     In contrast to these strengths, CJS data generally have very poor sensi-
tivity (excepting the NCVS). Furthermore, CJS data collection requires
criminal justice system interaction for case identification (excepting NCVS),
an activity that may be specifically avoided by older adults. Another weak-
ness is that UCR and NIBRS data are entirely record-based and are re-
moved from direct reports of victims. As a result, they are affected by
subjective interpretations by police officers of (1) whether an event actually
occurred and (2) classification of the event by police departments across the
country. Overall, these forms of assessment methodology represent pre-
liminary, as opposed to comprehensive, epidemiological data regarding
elder mistreatment.
270                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

                  Caretaker/Family Member Assessment
     Caretakers do, in fact, report their abusive behaviors. Coyne et al.
(1993) reported that 12 percent of caregivers calling a dementia care hot
line indicated that they had abused the individual under their care. Homer
and Gilleard (1990) studied respite care patients and caregivers in England
and found that 45 percent of caregivers admitted either verbal (41 percent)
or physical (14 percent) abuse. Interestingly, frequency of patient reports
of abuse was less than that of caregivers. Similarly, Pillemer and Suitor
(1992) interviewed family members of dementia patients and found that 6
percent reported violence. Pillemer and Finkelhor (1988) interviewed prox-
ies when older adults were unable to participate as respondents and found
higher rates of abuse than in victim reports (although this group of proxies
arguably represented elders at increased risk, and higher levels should be
expected). These studies, and studies cited below, demonstrate that
caregiver assessment may be an acceptable, albeit unidimensional, method
of detecting elder abuse in the subset of abusers willing to disclose these
behaviors. Sensitivity can be expected to be increased if provisions for
anonymity are enhanced.
     When using caregivers as the data source, researchers have either as-
sessed abusive behaviors directly through interviews or screens, or assessed
risk factors associated with perpetrating elder mistreatment. Risk factors
include alcoholism, social isolation, psychopathology, low socioeconomic
status, overdependence on the older adult, and inexperience or reluctance
to provide care (Reis and Nahmiash, 1998). In addition, caregiver risk-
factor assessment can be augmented by studying care-receiver risk factors,
such as being older, female, isolated, aggressive, or provocative.
     Reis and Nahmiash (1998) developed the 29-item (from an original 48
items) Indicators of Abuse (IOA) screen based on previous risk factor re-
search (Kosberg, 1988) with both caregivers and receivers. Although this is
a screen, it requires prior in-depth knowledge of caregiver and care-receiver
characteristics obtained through interview. The items were selected based
on their discriminant ability to detect elder mistreatment derived as part of
the major health and social services assessment offered in a North Ameri-
can city. Using the 29 items of the IOA that discriminated abuse from
nonabuse, sensitivity was about 85 percent and specificity was 99 percent.
Approximately 70 cases were reexamined by a panel to assure criterion
accuracy. Using these criterion references, 28 of the original 29 items
(caregiver age was dropped) achieved a sensitivity of 78.4 percent and a
specificity of 100 percent. Factor analyses failed to identify separate the-
matic problem areas. Notably, items such as needing help with activities of
daily life or cognitive or physical impairment did not contribute to discrimi-
nant ability. The overall findings indicate that caregiver rather than care
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                     271

receiver risk factors were most important in predicting abuse and neglect.
Using a cutoff of 16, about 22 percent of cases were missed (compared to
36 percent of cases missed by the Hwalek-Sengstock Elder Abuse Screening
Test, see below, which is completed by seniors, not interviewers). A no-
table strength of this tool is that it assesses multiple forms of abuse and
assesses both caregiver and care-receiver. Weaknesses include a high false
negative rate, limited applicability of the scale to assess domestic violence in
elder marital relationships (the Conflict Tactics Scale is useful for this, see
below), and the requirement of in depth knowledge of both caregiver and
care receiver.
     While risk factor assessment is most certainly a clinically valid tool for
social service workers, its usefulness in epidemiological studies, particularly
in initial investigations, is limited. This is because epidemiological studies
are often conducted with the aim, at least in part, of identifying risk factors.
Thus, using risk factors to select perpetrators in order to identify additional
risk factors is a tautological methodology, and should be avoided in epide-
miological efforts.
     The Caregiver Abuse Screen (CAS) (Reis and Nahmiash, 1995) is com-
pleted by caregivers, not interviewers, as was the case with the IOA. The
CAS is very short, only eight items, which somewhat superficially assess
forms of abuse and neglect. That is, direct questions regarding mistreat-
ment behaviors are avoided. The authors state that wording is based on
“control theory” in which a perpetrator’s sense of external locus of control
predicts abuse (Bendik, 1992). Conceptualization is also based on neutral-
ization theory, in which abuse is seen as justified and rationalized by the
abuser (Tomita, 1990). The CAS is specifically worded so as to be non-
blaming. The instrument was validated on 44 abusive caregivers and 45
nonabusive caregivers (the abusive caregivers and 45 controls were receiv-
ing services from a social services center). Designation as an abuser was
made on the basis of a thorough interview. Results indicated that overall
scores of abusers were significantly higher on the CAS (mean = 3.2) than
nonabusers (mean = 1.9). CAS scores were positively correlated (0.41) with
IOA scores. Unfortunately, no discriminant analyses were conducted, and
classification accuracy and optimal cutoff scores for detecting abuse and
neglect were not available (rather, only the mean scores of each group were
reported as significantly different; note, however, that scores differed by
only about one point). Weakness of this measure in terms of its applicabil-
ity to epidemiological efforts mirrors those of the IOA. Specifically, it is
clinically relevant but lacks detailed descriptions of mistreatment events, as
well as comprehensive psychometric validation.
     The health, attitudes toward aging, living arrangements, and finances
(HALF) is presented by Ferguson and Beck (1983) with no psychometric
data. This is a clinician-based tool to identify elders at risk in a health
272                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

service setting. Questions are answered by the interviewer following a
meeting with both the caretaker and older adult. Items are categorized in
terms of the scale’s name on a three-point Likert scale from “almost al-
ways” to “never.” The instrument is based on previous risk factor research
and probably covers relevant areas of assessment for elder mistreatment.
However, items in each section often bear no resemblance to the section
heading (e.g., under “health” and regarding “caregiver” comes the item
“limited capacity to express own needs,” or “poor self-image”). Neither
factor analysis nor discriminant analysis were conducted to validate con-
structs measured by item groups or to identify sensitivity or specificity.
Many items (e.g., “negative attitudes toward aging”) are extremely vague
and open to cultural speculation or subjectivity. Other items are clearly
physician-relevant (e.g., “shows evidence of dehydration or malnutrition”).
Although the screen generally addresses areas of mistreatment, including
physical abuse, neglect, and exploitation, no area is specifically assessed.
Moreover, the screen is clinically oriented and requires interviews of both
caregivers and care receivers. The lack of psychometric validation com-
bined with the vagueness of questions and the need for medical expertise
renders this screen of little use in epidemiological efforts. However, its use
in medical settings is probably justified.
     Fulmer and Cahill (1984) developed the Elder Assessment Protocol, a
tool for critical care nurses. The measure is relatively unstructured and
intended for use in clinical settings. A checklist of physical symptoms that
could be the result of abuse forms the core of the mistreatment assessment
protocol. However, these symptoms could have other origins. For ex-
ample, physical abuse is measured by the item, “physical abuse: present or
absent, suspect high risk.” In effect, this protocol is a reminder checklist for
clinicians but does not directly apply victimization assessment techniques
(discussed below) to enhance sensitivity. No psychometric data are pro-
vided.
     Fulmer also developed the Elder Assessment Instrument (EAI) a 35-
item screen that includes subjective and objective items regarding mistreat-
ment (Fulmer and O’Malley, 1987; Fulmer and Cahill, 1984). This screen
is designed to identify individuals at high risk of mistreatment who should
be referred for further assessment. There is no scoring system, and the tool
is designed for clinical rather than epidemiological use.
     Overall, several indices and interviews exist and have been used suc-
cessfully with caregivers to measure elder mistreatment. Caregivers can be
asked directly about their abusive or neglectful behaviors, or they can be
assessed in terms of risk factors. However, risk factor assessment is more
appropriate in clinical than in epidemiological settings. Caregiver assess-
ment can be used in cases where older adults suffer from cognitive deficits
and to augment direct assessment of care receivers. Caretaker assessment
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                    273

appears to be the most sensitive method of detecting elder mistreatment in
instances where older adults live with family members and suffer from
significant cognitive impairment. Indeed, when older adults cannot serve as
reliable historians or reporters of mistreatment, family caretaker assess-
ment maybe the only available alternative. However, when cognitively
impaired older adults reside in care facilities, the usefulness of caretaker
assessment is less well established. This is because there are multiple care-
taking staff for any single individual, the turnover rate of these staff is
extremely high, precluding accurate long-term (i.e., multiyear retrospective)
assessment, and the consequence of disclosure of abusive behavior is more
immediately apparent (e.g., immediate suspension or termination).


                        Assessment of Older Adults
     Epidemiological investigations with young adults and adolescents sup-
port direct interviewing of potential victim populations to determine the
extent and character of mistreatment. It is logical to conclude that, for
cognitively unimpaired older adults, direct assessment will also be useful.
The following measures have been used with older adults. An additional
interview methodology is proposed later.
     The Hwalek-Sengstock Elder Abuse Screening Test (HSEAST) is a pa-
per-and-pencil index of elder mistreatment with some psychometric evalu-
ation. Neale et al. (1991) validated the 15-item screen and found that 9 of
these items identified abused or exploited individuals. Items are scored yes
or no, and a score of 3.5 or higher is indicative of abuse. Three domains of
elder abuse are assessed: overt symptoms, victim risk characteristics, and
victim symptom characteristics (the authors categorize these as violation of
personal rights or direct abuse, characteristics of vulnerability, and poten-
tially abusive situation). The test has some psychometric support of its
construct, concurrent, and discriminant validity. The authors compared
responses from 170 older adults who were agency referred with founded
abuse cases with agency-referred nonfounded cases (n = 47) and a non-APS
agency comparison group of elderly women (n = 47). Significantly higher
scores were noted for the abused group, and item-level analysis indicated
that nine items provided the basis for this difference. Discriminant function
analyses of the nine relevant items revealed correct classification 74 percent
of the time, with false negatives (35.7 percent) more likely than false posi-
tives (9.3 percent).
     Advantages of the HSEAST include its preliminary psychometric vali-
dation, along with the fact that it is based on factor analysis of a large item
pool. The test is able to assess risk factors along victim and situation lines
and can facilitate direction or allocation of additional resources or assess-
ment measures when risk is present. Although it assesses aspects of physi-
274                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

cal abuse, exploitation, and neglect, no specific assessment of any type of
mistreatment is made. One replication study of 100 elders in public hous-
ing (Moody et al., 2000) was recently completed to measure discriminant
ability of the test again. Factor analysis indicated some differences in
loadings from the original study; however, discriminant analyses indicated
that the test again classified correctly about 70 percent of respondents as
abused or not abused. False positives (17 percent) were more likely in this
study than false negatives (12 percent).
     The HSEAST suffers from some specific deficits. Several items are
extremely vague and lack behavioral specificity when describing events.
That is, actual events cannot be determined from this screen, as they can
from the Conflict Tactics Scale. However, this screen is designed to be
followed by a more in-depth interview when indicated by higher scores.
Some items are not directly related to abuse (e.g., a response of “someone
else” to the question, “who makes decisions about your life?” or the ques-
tion, “Do you feel that nobody wants you around?”). Some questions
measure potentially abusive situations instead of actual events (e.g., “Can
you take your own medication and get around by yourself?” “Are you
helping to support someone?”). As a screen, the typical preference is that
false-positive rates exceed false-negative rates, and the opposite was ob-
served here. Moreover, there is limited replication of discriminant ability at
this point. Overall, this tool may be useful more clinically than epidemio-
logically.
     According to the NEAIS, two-thirds of elder mistreatment cases in-
volved spouses or children. Similarly, Pillemer and Finkelhor (1988) found
that 65 percent of elder abuse cases involved spouses as perpetrators. For
this reason, and for the conceptual similarities between domestic violence
and mistreatment of non-cognitively impaired elders, inclusion of domestic
violence assessment methods when measuring elder mistreatment is justi-
fied.
     The Conflict Tactics Scale (CTS) (Straus, 1979) and the Revised Con-
flict Tactics Scale (CTS2) are well known, studied, and used indexes of
relationship violence. The CTS2 (Straus et al., 1996), originally developed
by Straus (1979), is a widely used (over 70,000 empirical studies have used
it) and thoroughly evaluated (approximately 400 papers) measure of inter-
personal violence for married or cohabiting partners; it has been modified
for use with caregivers to the elderly (Pillemer and Finkelhor, 1988). Note
that it is not a measure of attitudes toward violence, but rather a measure of
conflict-resolution events that involve violence. The scale also measures
psychological abusiveness and the use of negotiation and reasoning by
either party to reduce conflict. Although the CTS has undergone numerous
revisions in the past 15 years, its basic structure has remained the same.
The most recent version contains several scales: reasoning/negotiation (6
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                    275

items), psychological aggression (8 items), physical assault (12 items), sexual
coercion (7 items), and consequence (physical injury) (6 items). The 39
items are rated on an 8-point frequency scale (never, once, twice, 3 to 5
times, 6 to 10 times, 11 to 20 times, and more than 20 times, not in the past
year but it did happen before). Interpersonal problem-resolution behaviors
range from benign (e.g., “When you had a dispute has spouse discussed the
issue calmly?”) to dangerous (e.g., “Has your spouse threatened you with a
knife or gun?”). Each question is asked in terms of both respondent’s and
partner’s behavior. Reliability ranges from 0.79 to 0.95, and initial evi-
dence of construct validity has been obtained (reliability and validity of the
scale are well established, and early factor analysis revealed constructs
representing (1) verbal reasoning, (2) psychological abuse/aggression, (3)
physical aggression, and (4) life-threatening violence. The CTS allows
different types (physical and sexual) and intensities of violence to be docu-
mented and collects data on specific behavioral aspects of violent events. It
can be used in both clinical and epidemiological settings. Weaknesses of
the CTS include a potential overfocus on physical and sexual violence
incident identification in that the CTS does not assess financial exploitation
or neglect.
     Using a modified version of the CTS (in addition to other queries)
Pillemer and Finkelhor (1988) directly studied over 2,000 randomly se-
lected older adults in the Boston metropolitan area. A two-stage interview
was used in which a 30-minute screening interview (conducted either via
telephone or in person) was followed by a more thorough interview to
assess the context and specific aspects of abuse. The decision to use tele-
phone or in person interviews was made on the basis of respondent avail-
ability, ability, and preference to use the telephone (telephone was the
default method). An oversample of older adults living with others (a major
abuse risk factor) was studied to increase likelihood of interviewing abuse
victims. Proxy interviews were also conducted in instances where older
adults were incapable of being interviewed. Modified CTS questions were
used to assess physical abuse. Modified Older Americans Resources and
Services questions were used to assess neglect. Precise wording of assess-
ment questions was not provided in the report.
     The strengths of this modified elder mistreatment assessment method-
ology included combining the CTS with a prescreen to limit assessment
time. In addition, multiple assessment formats were used, including tele-
phone, in-person, and proxy interviews. Weaknesses were few. Most no-
tably, event-based interviews cannot study neglect and abuse of demented
individuals, and of course caregivers or proxies must be assessed in these
instances, but this weakness is not inherent in this assessment method,
per se.
     Several other measures have been used to study elder abuse, ranging
276                                                  ELDER MISTREATMENT

from simple questions regarding mistreatment behaviors to clinical inter-
view protocols. Some of these measures provide little or no psychometric
validation or actual specification of items. Others measure constructs re-
lated to elder mistreatment, but not mistreatment per se. They are men-
tioned here in the interest of achieving comprehensiveness.
     The modified Elder Abuse Attitudes and Behavior Intention Scale-re-
vised (Childs et al., 2000) assesses attitudes toward abuse, intentions to
abuse, and actual behaviors of abuse in caregivers. Although this scale
measures both attitudes and intentions (e.g., potential risk factors) as well
as behaviors, it is not specifically designed to measure prevalence or inci-
dence of abuse. Childs and colleagues report some indication that perpetra-
tors tend to “fake good.”
     Coyne and colleagues (1993) sent anonymous questionnaires to 1,000
caregivers who called a dementia hot line. Three hundred forty-two com-
pleted and returned questionnaires, which contained 30 items assessing
caregiver characteristics, demented senior characteristics, and specific abu-
sive behaviors. Functioning was also assessed. The manner and type of
abusive behaviors for which data were collected were not specified further
than “punching, shoving, biting, kicking, and striking.” This measure was
inexpensive, and confidence in reports of abuse is high. However, confi-
dence in nonreports is low. Moreover, no psychometric data were available
on reliability or validity. No assessment of financial exploitation, neglect,
or psychological abuse was indicated in the article, and a low response rate
to the mailed questionnaire mitigated results.
     Cooney and Mortimer (1995) also sent anonymous postal question-
naires to 200 British caretakers who participated with a dementia support
organization. Questions followed the format of Pillemer and Finkelhor
(1988), thus apparently some form of the CTS was used for physical abuse,
although the report gave no specifics. Physical abuse, verbal abuse, threats
and verbal aggression, and neglect were measured. Data were collected on
caregivers (substance use, psychiatric history, length of care) and victims
(physical dependency, behavioral disturbance). The response rate was 33.5
percent. Strengths included assessment of multiple forms of abuse and
seemingly high sensitivity, with 55 percent of respondents reporting some
abuse. However, low response rate to survey must be considered.
     Finally, Sengstock and Hwalek (1986) reviewed items (not the mea-
sures as complete indices) from seven assessment indices from the early
1980s. Most of the items on these scales assessed risk rather than incidents
of elder mistreatment (57.6 percent of all items). Sixteen percent measured
neglect and 14.3 percent measured physical abuse. Sexual abuse, emotional
abuse, and exploitation were largely omitted. The measures from which
items were collected consisted of two social service intake-screening sheets
(South Carolina, Ohio), an index from a conference paper presentation
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                     277

(Hooyman, 1982; Tomita, 1982), an unpublished index from the Univer-
sity of Massachusetts Medical Center, and three published manuscripts
(Block and Sinnott, 1979; Johnson, 1981). The review authors described
these measures as largely driven by caseworker familiarity with the older
adult’s case and indicated that “such depth of information may require
many months to develop.” Moreover, these measures were described as
depending “a great deal upon the judgment of the service provider” and
may be overly subjective, producing results of questionable validity.
     A final group of purely clinical assessment protocols includes the Screen-
ing Protocol for Identification of Abuse and Neglect of the Elderly (Johnson,
1981), the Elder Abuse Detection Indicators (Bloom et al., 1989), Tomita’s
(1982) Detection and Treatment of Elderly Abuse and Neglect: Protocol for
Health Care Professionals, and the Community Based Education Model for
Identification and Prevention of Elder Abuse (Weiner, 1991). Although
clinically useful, these tools have little or no psychometric validation, gener-
ally use little behavioral description (see “Issues Pertaining to Assessment of
Victimization,” below) when posing queries about mistreatment, and are
inappropriate for epidemiological efforts. They may also lack sensitivity in
clinical realms due to the method and context within which questions are
vaguely asked. Examples come from Johnson (1981): “8. Can patient
relate instances of: being shaken, shoved?” and from Tomita (1982): “Ask
patient if he/she experiences: (a) being shoved, shaken, or hit.” These
questions, while seemingly relevant, lack specificity and do not employ
contextually orienting preface statements or behaviorally specific descrip-
tions about queried events. Research with younger adults indicates that
these two characteristics are essential for violence assessment, and further
definition and discussion of these aspects is provided in the following sec-
tion. As such, these protocols represent guidelines, rather than specific
assessment manuals or strategies.



   ISSUES PERTAINING TO ASSESSMENT OF VICTIMIZATION:
    WHAT WE’VE LEARNED FROM RESEARCH ON VIOLENCE
          AGAINST CHILDREN AND YOUNG ADULTS


    The following discussion involves techniques used with cognitively in-
tact adolescents and young adults to determine violence prevalence and
characteristics. These methods are not appropriate for use with cognitively
impaired or demented older adults. For these individuals, the NEAIS meth-
odology in which APS reports and sentinel reports are used to estimate the
rate of abuse, combined with caretaker interviews, are indicated to assess
the multiple forms of elder mistreatment (see below).
278                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

     The research on violence against young adults and children, particu-
larly that research involving direct assessment of victims (as opposed to
agency/sentinel report sources of data) is more advanced than that on older
adults. From this research it is evident that prevalence estimates for crimi-
nal victimization, including sexual assault, physical assault, and domestic
violence may vary widely according to parameters of assessment methodol-
ogy, including assessment context, assessment structure, assessor character-
istics, and trauma definition (Breslau et al., 1991; Hanson et al., 1995;
Kilpatrick et al., 1989; Koss et al., 1993; Resnick et al., 1993, 1996). For
example, in interview studies, contextual cues may prime participants to
respond in a particular manner. That is, assessment by medical doctors
conducted in a primary care facility may be less likely to detect victimiza-
tion than assessment by criminal justice system epidemiologists conducting
crime surveys because respondents in the former situation are primed to
answer questions about their health, whereas respondents in the latter situ-
ation are expecting to answer questions about victimization. Moreover,
definitions of assault vary among respondents (Koss et al., 1993). For
example, asking, “Have you ever been raped?” may mean different things
to different people (e.g., “It’s not rape if my husband does it.”). Such
culturally, generationally, or ethnically charged questions, if not restruc-
tured, will produce inaccurate estimates of violence prevalence.
     In addition to definitional and contextual problems, violent crime, par-
ticularly that type of crime associated with interpersonal, psychological, or
cultural stigma (e.g., elder abuse), is not readily reported by all victims,
particularly older adults. Indeed, victims of assault do not openly identify
themselves as such. For example, only 2 percent of sexually abused young
adult women discuss their victimization history with their doctor (Spring
and Friedrich, 1992). Therefore, victim self-identification to strangers con-
ducting epidemiological surveys cannot be taken for granted. In fact, in
order to report to an investigator that a particular type of mistreatment or
crime has occurred, a victim must (1) recall the assault, (2) label the assault
as such, (3) be queried by an investigator who is using a matching label/
definition, (4) be willing and psychologically able to disclose the assault,
and (5) not feel that safety is jeopardized (e.g., when the perpetrator lives
with the respondent and might be listening to the interview). While straight-
forward, these factors must not be overlooked. For example, many respon-
dents do not label aggravated assault as such when the perpetrator is a
relative or spouse, or when there was only limited force or threat of force
used, or when the psychological effects of such a label are too distressing.
Furthermore, many victims are very reluctant to disclose their victimization
experiences. Reasons for willful nondisclosure include: (1) fear of retribu-
tion by an assailant, particularly if the assailant is known or proximate to
victim; (2) fear of stigma attached to being a victim of a particular type of
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                     279

crime (e.g., rape, domestic violence); (3) fear of being blamed; (4) history of
negative outcomes following previous disclosure (e.g., placement in a nurs-
ing home, court involvement leading to acquittal); (5) lack of encourage-
ment to discuss victimization; and (6) fear of psychological consequences of
disclosure (e.g., depression, anxiety on revisiting the event) (Kilpatrick,
1983; Koss et al., 1993; Resnick et al., 1996). It should be obvious that
investigators conducting prevalence studies must not assume that all victim-
ization events will be specifically and easily reported. Unfortunately, this
stipulation has not always been met (e.g., FBI Uniform Crime Reports,
1991; Bachman, 1992; Helzer et al., 1987).
      Given that the above factors will combine to reduce the likelihood that
a crime event will be reported, what procedural modifications have been
used with young adults and children to maximize sensitivity? Two compo-
nents appear crucial: (1) contextually orienting, empathetic preface state-
ments and (2) extremely specific behavioral descriptions of index events
that elicit closed-ended responses. Because traumatic events such as violent
crime are associated with extremely aversive emotional and cognitive states,
it is important, both to respondent welfare and to experimental integrity, to
preface criminal victimization queries in such a way as to convey accep-
tance, empathy, normalization, and encouragement. Obviously, victims
will disclose extremely personal and frequently humiliating information
only when they feel that such disclosure is worthwhile and relevant. Of
equal import, preface statements must also provide contextual orientation
so that the likelihood of reporting that information sought by the investiga-
tor is maximized. For example, if questions regarding elder abuse follow a
crime survey in which reported crimes are investigated, and no preface
statement is used to specifically direct respondents to disclose all assaults,
including those not reported to authorities, then respondents might be
biased toward disclosing only those events that have been reported to police
(Koss et al., 1993). Similarly, if questions regarding assault follow a psy-
chopathology survey, then respondents might be biased toward disclosing
only those assaults that are of a relatively bizarre nature (Koss et al., 1993).
Epidemiological researchers studying violence against younger adults and
children are typically interested in all experienced events. Thus, it must be
made clear to the respondent that the individual collecting these data is
interested in any assault perpetrated by any individual, at any time in their
lives (e.g., assaults by family members years ago, as opposed to just assaults
by strangers in the recent past). The National Women’s Study (Kilpatrick
et al., 1992) and the National Survey of Adolescents (Kilpatrick et al.,
2000), both population-based violence assessment projects, employed con-
textually orienting preface statements similar to the one below. Note that
after normalizing the experience somewhat, respondents are oriented to
280                                                      ELDER MISTREATMENT

disclose all assaults (reported to authorities or not), by all perpetrators
(including family members), occurring at any time (even distant past events).

       Another type of stressful event that many people have experi-
   enced is unwanted sexual advances. These experiences are not always
   reported to the police or other authorities or even discussed with
   family or friends. The person making the advances isn’t always a
   stranger, but can be a friend, boyfriend, or even a family member.
   Such experiences can occur anytime in a person’s life—even as a child.
   Regardless of how long ago it happened or who made the advances.

     In successful studies of violence against younger populations, contextu-
ally orienting preface statements are followed by detailed, behaviorally
specific, closed-ended descriptions of trauma events under investigation.
Early CJS surveys of violence employed gateway screening questions char-
acterized by very limited behavioral specificity (e.g., “Have you ever been
physically abused?”). If respondents endorsed the gateway question, fur-
ther questions about assault followed. Gateway questions shorten the
overall interview process for those respondents not endorsing the gateway
item. Unfortunately, gateway questions without preface statements lack
specificity and do not adequately orient respondents to the type of re-
sponses the assessor is seeking (i.e., they fail to state that one is interested in
all abuse/assaults, not just those reported to police or perpetrated by strang-
ers). Most problematic, however, is that gateway questions are extremely
subject to an individual’s interpretation of queries (i.e., definitional vari-
ance) (Koss et al., 1993), and a respondent’s own victimization history will
affect his or her personal definitions of elder abuse (Childs et al., 2000).
Behaviorally specific, closed-ended (i.e., yes/no) questions are an alternative
to gateway questions. Behaviorally specific descriptions of assault events
minimize variance associated with cultural differences, personal differences
in intellect, psychological stability, general willingness to disclose, or under-
standing of criminal justice terminology (e.g., rape, aggravated assault).
These questions should be designed with great detail and require only yes or
no answers in response to whether or not a specifically described event was
experienced. In addition to removing definitional and cultural variance
associated with gateway questions, closed-ended yes or no questions sim-
plify the role of the respondent and minimize the risk that anyone will
overhear disclosure of highly personal events, particularly during telephone
interviews, where at least the queries are unintelligible to others not on the
phone. The following are examples of behaviorally specific questions from
the National Womens Study. These questions follow directly after the
preface statement outlined above and leave very little room for interpreta-
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                   281

tion or error in assessment of a particular type of victimization, in this
instance, rape.

    1. Has a man or boy ever made you have sex by using force or
threatening to harm you or someone close to you? Just so there is no
mistake, by sex we mean putting a penis in your vagina. 2. Has anyone,
male or female, ever made you have oral sex by using force or threat of
harm? Just so there is no mistake, by oral sex we mean that a man or a boy
put his penis in your mouth or someone, male or female, penetrated your
vagina or anus with their mouth or tongue. 3. Has anyone ever made you
have anal sex by using force or threat of harm? Just so there is no mistake,
by anal sex we mean that a man or boy put his penis in your anus. 4. Has
anyone, male or female, ever put fingers or objects in your vagina or anus
against your will by using force or threats? (Kilpatrick et al., 1992)

    Note that each of the above questions is entirely event-based. That is,
priority is given to establishing that mistreatment has or has not occurred.
Follow-up questions are asked only in instances where affirmative responses
to violence type queries have been given. Thus, secondary questions about
the event context and perpetrator status are skipped out when the respon-
dent says “no” to a query. Importantly, computerized protocols can be
programmed with complex skip-out patterns resulting in dramatically short-
ened interview times for those respondents who do not endorse victimiza-
tion events. For those who indicate that a specific form of violence has
occurred, additional questions regarding relationship to the perpetrator,
whether or not the event was one in a series, the first and most recent times
the event occurred, etc., can be asked. Combining highly specific behavior-
based questions with computer-assisted skip out patterns achieves the same
brevity of interviews found in gateway surveys, without a loss in sensitivity.
Most importantly, this method allows assessment of both abuse by family
or caretakers and assault by strangers.


           TELEPHONE VERSUS IN-PERSON INTERVIEW
                  SURVEY METHODOLOGY
     The previous discussion involved methodology used with younger
adults in at least three prior population-based studies. This survey tech-
nique can be conducted in person or via telephone using random digit
dialing methodology, in which stratified samples are derived and randomly
called. Several advantages exist for each format. In-person interviews
permit visual contact between interviewers and respondents. In-person
interviewers can also modulate their volume to a relatively greater extent
than telephone interviewers. In addition, conducting in-person interviews
282                                                  ELDER MISTREATMENT

allows surveyors to select an appropriate assessment location (i.e., a quiet,
undisturbed room, as opposed to wherever the respondent happens to have
his or her phone). In-person interviews may also facilitate expressions of
empathy, honesty, and respect, which then might encourage more complete
self-disclosure (Goodstein, 1980). Finally, in-person interviews can be con-
ducted in households that do not have telephones. (However, the advan-
tage of in-person interviews over telephone interviews insofar as telephone
availability is concerned may be illusory. For example, according to the
1990 census, only 5 percent of U. S. households did not have telephones.)
     By contrast, data indicate that telephone-based interviewing is an effi-
cient method for collecting information from large representative samples
of respondents at a relatively low cost with insignificant response bias in
detection of critical variables of interest when compared to in-person inter-
view approaches (Weeks et al., 1983; Bradburn, 1984). These issues have
been examined specifically in terms of detection of rates of victimization
using in-person versus telephone interview methods (Catlin and Murray,
1979). Based on objective police report data, no differences in rates of
detection of victimization were observed, supporting both the reliability
and validity of the telephone method. One study (Paulsen et al., 1988)
compared telephone and in-person assessment of DSM-III Axis I disorders,
including anxiety disorders, affective disorders, alcoholism, and no mental
disorder using a structured diagnostic interview. Kappa ranging from 0.69
to 0.84 was obtained, even with a delay between in-person and telephone
methods of 12 to 19 months.
     There are several additional advantages to telephone assessment of
victimization and psychopathology, particularly when considering inter-
viewing older adult respondents. Many older adults indicate that they are
hesitant to allow a stranger into their home for a variety of reasons (e.g.,
safety, feeling compelled to clean the house for the interviewer). The tele-
phone format may also be perceived as relatively more anonymous and less
intimidating than in-person disclosures of personal victimization, particu-
larly when perpetrators are family members. Indeed, this anonymity may
facilitate disclosure of embarrassing or potentially problematic material.
Moreover, this anonymity may reduce the risk of negative outcomes on
disclosure of abuse events. That is, if an interview is conducted in person,
the interviewer is present in the house and clearly noticed by the abuser.
The abuser may even overhear the interview questions and be aware of the
older adult’s responses. This is not a problem during telephone-based
interviews.
     Telephone-based interviewing also has the advantage of improving ac-
cess to participants from across the socioeconomic status range. Thus, the
very rich, rich, middle class, lower class, and poor are equally approach-
able, if they have a telephone. It is unlikely that the upper and lower ends
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                   283

of the socioeconomic spectrum would be available for in-person interviews.
Another important concern and advantage of telephone assessment is inter-
viewer safety. In order to achieve national representativeness, all geo-
graphic and economic areas must be surveyed and interviewers must enter
high-crime areas where they will be at increased risk for victimization.
Telephone-based assessment overcomes the risk of victimization that inter-
viewers would certainly face. Another advantage of telephone interviews,
particularly those that employ computer-assisted telephone interview tech-
nology, is greater and more easily verified standardization (e.g., supervisor
spot checks via remote computers). That is, interviewers following a com-
puter generated script with computer-prompted skip-outs who are ran-
domly monitored by supervisors are far less likely to suffer from inter-
viewer drift than interviewers who are not so prompted or supervised.
Thus, the integrity of the interview and subsequent collected data are more
thoroughly preserved by the telephone interviewing methodology. More-
over, telephone interviews are far less expensive than in-person interviews
and generally require significantly less time to complete. Finally, logistic
factors such as scheduling, dealing with mandatory reporting issues, over-
coming participant hesitation at having strangers in the house, and so on,
are relatively less problematic for telephone-based interviews.


              COLLECTING SUPPLEMENTAL DATA IN
               ADDITION TO THE VIOLENT EVENT
     In addition to verifying that a particular form of assault has occurred,
social and health science researchers are typically interested in determining
health outcomes of such events. In order to derive conceptual models that
outline assault-to-pathology pathways, multiple aspects of trauma and trau-
matic response must be considered. Unfortunately, most studies of assault-
related pathology have been somewhat limited in their assessment of vari-
ables that play potentially important roles in emotional and physical
functioning. Specifically, assault events are routinely examined in isolation,
with little consideration given to the differential effects of multiple versus
single assault, early-childhood versus later-life assault, assault by stranger
versus acquaintance assault, and so on. This point is particularly relevant
when considering that approximately 50 percent of physically and sexually
assaulted individuals have prior victimization histories (e.g., Kilpatrick et
al., 1992). Kilpatrick et al. (2000) suggest that new studies be designed in
accord with the following: (1) Temporal boundaries of prevalence rates
should be widened to include all adult, or even all lifetime, events. Failure
to attend to crime occurring across the life span (e.g., the NCVS) produces
artificially bounded prevalence rates. Such methodology might oversim-
plify causal models involving events that contribute to mental and medical
284                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

pathology. (2) Multiple or complex victimization histories for each respon-
dent should be collected and considered in causal models of psychopathol-
ogy, as opposed to focusing on one type of crime, occurring at one point in
time, committed by one type of assailant (e.g., the FBI’s UCR, in which only
the most serious victimization is included in prevalence rates; assessment of
abuse by family members or caretakers, but not by strangers). (3) Studied
samples should be representative of the population of interest. (4) Both
quantitative aspects (e.g., level of physical injury experienced, number of
perpetrators, presence of weapon during assault) and qualitative aspects
(e.g., perceptions of life threat during assault, fear of crime) of victimization
history should be obtained and studied. (5) Other contextual factors that
influence postviolence outcome, including familial and personal history of
psychopathology, social and vocational adjustment, and level of social sup-
port, should be assessed.


  CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
     There are two very distinct groups of elderly victims: those without
significant cognitive impairment living independently, with a relative or
caretaker, or in a care setting, and those with cognitive impairment, typi-
cally in the last two settings. These two classes of victims very likely require
different assessment methodologies for two major reasons. First and most
obvious, the nature of cognitive impairment limits one’s ability to partici-
pate in survey research. Second, the type of elder mistreatment very likely
varies with the level of cognitive impairment. Moreover, the location of the
elder also determines, in some part, the type of mistreatment to which she
or he will be exposed (e.g., familial abuse is less likely in institutionalized
elders). Existing methods to identify elder abuse fall into five groups: (1)
agency record review, (2) sentinel reports, (3) criminal justice statistics, (4)
caretaker/family member interview, and (5) interviews of elderly respon-
dents themselves (in person or via telephone).
     In the past, research made a distinction when studying victimization of
older adults in that assessment efforts were confined to investigating either
elder abuse/neglect by family members (including caregivers) or nonfamilial
criminal violence, but not both. This distinction may be artificial for three
reasons. First, the physical and emotional effects of such events, particu-
larly elder abuse and nonfamilial physical and sexual assault, are often very
similar, or at least share a number of similarities (Acierno et al., 1997).
Second, both forms of violence appear to have several risk factors in com-
mon (e.g., poverty, limited resources, previous victimization), indicating
that victims of one type of assault may be more likely to experience the
other type of assault than nonvictims. Third, both forms of victimization
are amenable to assessment through similar methodological strategies. Stud-
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                     285

ies that endeavor to delineate risk factors for abuse or violence toward
older adults should, therefore, simultaneously assess both forms of victim-
ization when possible. Similarly, studies conducted to outline effects of
these events on the elderly, and studies conducted to inform preventive
interventions for both violence and effects of violence should use a method-
ology that assesses both forms of victimization. One such method is event-
based interviewing such as that used in the National Women’s Study and
National Survey of Adolescents, in which all forms of elder mistreatment
are first identified, followed by perpetrator specification. As such, both
assault by strangers and abuse by caretakers/relatives are measured in the
same population with the same instrument.


                    Feasibility, Sensitivity, and Cost:
               Older Adults Without Cognitive Impairment
     For the group of elderly victims with no cognitive impairment, the most
feasible methodology to produce population prevalence estimates for physi-
cal, sexual, and emotional forms of violence, as well as for financial exploi-
tation, is direct respondent survey via telephone, similar to that used by
Pillemer and Finkelhor (1988). However, a major departure from previous
efforts would be to widen the net of assessed violence against older adults
to include all violent events using behaviorally specific close-ended ques-
tions, with a determination of perpetrator status following determination
of event occurrence. This methodology has been used with adolescents and
young adults effectively to measure both domestic violence and stranger
assault, and could be applied to older adults as well. Thus, combining the
methodology of Pillemer and Finkelhor with the content structure of
Kilpatrick et al. (National Women’s Study) yields “comprehensive violence
against the elderly” assessment data. In the past, telephone survey random
digit dialing (RDD) procedures were precluded when the target population
was significantly represented by individuals in institutions that used inter-
nal telephone switchboards for residents’ telephones. However, newer and
upgraded assisted care institutions and facilities for those who are physi-
cally, as opposed to cognitively, disabled often have direct lines to residents’
rooms and apartments. As such, this group is also potentially reachable by
RDD techniques. This methodology also has the significant advantage of
assessing a variety of categories of elder mistreatment simultaneously, com-
pared to record review or FBI UCRs, in which types of mistreatment are
largely limited to specific crime types that may or may not be in line with
elder abuse definitions (e.g., verbal assault and emotional abuse). Finally,
comparisons of criminal justice system/victimization studies using incident-
based methodology (FBI UCR) to RDD methodology indicate tremendously
286                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

improved sensitivity for the latter. Although in-person interviewing is also
extremely sensitive, telephone methodology is far more cost-effective.


                   Feasibility, Sensitivity, and Cost:
           Older Adults with Significant Cognitive Impairment
     For the group of older adults suffering from dementia, survey interview
methodology, whether in person or over the telephone, is probably not
feasible or sensitive. For this group, a combination of agency record review
and sentinel reporting, such as that employed in the NEAIS, would be
indicated. However, until elder abuse statutes that compel reporting are
unified and implemented across states, and until service-providing profes-
sionals are educated about this compulsion to report instances of elder
abuse and neglect—that is, until elder abuse is treated similarly to child
abuse for cognitively disabled elders—estimates derived by agency records
and sentinel systems will lack sensitivity. To improve sensitivity, these
methods might be augmented by caretaker interviews. Note that studies
with victims of domestic violence have asked potential perpetrators of as-
sault about their sexually and physically abusive behaviors. Interestingly,
these respondents reported significant levels of abuse. Precedent also exists
in the elder abuse literature for such methodology. For example, Pillemer
and Finkelhor (1988), who interviewed proxies when the older adults des-
ignated respondent was incapable of providing self report, found even higher
rates of elder abuse (of course, the conclusion that use of proxy report is
more sensitive is premature because the group of disabled older adults has
been identified as at greater risk of abuse, and hence higher numbers were
expected). Thus, interviewing potential perpetrators may provide good
information, particularly if used in conjunction with other methodologies.
Random sample in person epidemiological interviews are very likely the
most sensitive at detecting cases of elder abuse by virtue of their ability to
allow interviewers to “lay eyes on” the respondent and his or her environ-
ment. However, in-person interviewing is the least feasible and most costly
of all methodologies. Tables 10-1 and 10-2 outline the author’s impres-
sions of the aforementioned assessment methodologies, and those covered
above, in terms of feasibility, sensitivity, and cost.


                                SUMMARY
    Abuse assessment of older adults with significant dementia or other
cognitive impairment is most appropriately accomplished by agency record
review and sentinel reports, as in the NEAIS. However, these endeavors
could be significantly enhanced by including caretaker interviews. For
those older adults who are not cognitively impaired, direct interview ap-
pears most appropriate. Assessment of this group might also be enhanced
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                       287

TABLE 10-1 Assessment of Seniors with No Significant Cognitive
Impairment
                                          Feasibility   Sensitivity   Cost

Record review                              +            _             +

Sentinel reports                           ?            _             ?

Criminal justice statistic translation     +            _             +

RDD telephone survey: victims              +            +             +

RDD telephone survey: family/caretakers   +             ?             +

In-person interview: victims               _            +             _

In-person interview: family/caretakers     –            ?             –




TABLE 10-2 Assessment of Seniors with Significant Cognitive
Impairment
                                          Feasibility   Sensitivity   Cost

Record review                              +            ?             +

Sentinel reports                           ?            ?             ?

Criminal justice statistic translation     +            _             +

RDD telephone survey: victims              _            _             +

RDD telephone survey: family/caretakers    +            ?             +

In-person interview: victims               _            _             _

In-person interview: family/caretakers     _            ?             _




by caretaker interview; however, care must be taken to protect respondents
in such studies from perpetrator violence triggered by assessment (e.g., if
the perpetrator is aware that the older adult has participated in a survey of
violence and has incriminated the perpetrator, albeit anonymously, the
perpetrator may be angered). Research with young adults and children
demonstrates specific techniques to enhance sensitivity of assessment proto-
cols, and these methodologies should be incorporated into assessment stud-
ies of elder mistreatment.
288                                                                ELDER MISTREATMENT

                                      REFERENCES
Acierno, R., H. Resnick, and D. Kilpatrick
   1997      Health impact of interpersonal violence. Section I: Prevalence rates, case identifi-
             cation, and risk factors for sexual assault, physical assault, and domestic violence
             in men and women. Behavioral Medicine 23:53–64.
Anetzberger, G.J., B.R. Palmigano, M. Sanders, D. Bass, C. Dayton, S. Eckert, and M.R.
Schimer
   2000      A model intervention for elder abuse and dementia. The Gerontologist 40:492–
             497.
Bachman, R.
   1992      Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report: Elderly Victims. NCJ-138330. Wash-
             ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Baron, S., and A. Welty
   1996      Elder abuse. Journal of Gerontological Social Work 25:336–457.
Bendik, M.F.
   1992      Reaching the breaking point: Dangers of mistreatment in elder caregiving situa-
             tions. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 4(3):39–59.
Block, J.D., and M.R. Sinnott
   1979      The Battered Elder Syndrome: An Exploratory Study. College Park, MD: Uni-
             versity of Maryland Center on Aging (Abuse Report Form).
Bloom, J., P. Ansell, M. and M. Bloom
   1989      Detecting elder abuse: A guide for physicians. Geriatrics 44:40–44.
Bradburn, N.M.
   1984      Discussion: Telephone Survey Methodology. Proceedings of the 4th Conference
             on Health Survey Research Methods, Washington, DC. DHHS Publication No.
             (PHS) 84-3346. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Breslau, N., G.C. Davis, P. Andreski, and E. Petersen
   1991      Traumatic events and posttraumatic stress disorder in an urban population of
             young adults. Archives of General Psychiatry 48:216–222.
Catlin, G., and S. Murray
   1979      Report on Canadian Victimization Survey Methodology Pretests. Ottawa, ON:
             Statistics Canada.
Childs, H.W., B. Hayslip, Jr., L.M. Radika, and J.A. Reinberg
   2000      Young and middle-aged adults’ perceptions of elder abuse. The Gerontologist
             40:75–85.
Comijs, H.C., B.W.J.H. Pennix, K.P.M. Knipsheer, and W. Tilburg
   1999      Psychological distress in victims of elder mistreatment: The effects of social
             support and coping. Journal of Gerontology 54B:P240–P245.
Comijs, H.C., A.M. Pot, J.H. Smit, L.M. Bouter, and C. Jonker
   1998      Elder abuse in the community: Prevalence and consequences. Journal of Ameri-
             can Geriatrics Society 46:885–888.
Cooney, C., and A. Mortimer
   1995      Elder abuse and dementia: A pilot study. International Journal of Social Psychia-
             try 41:276–283.
Coyne, A.C., W.E. Reichman, and L.J. Berbig
   1993      The relationship between dementia and elder abuse. American Journal of Psy-
             chiatry 150:643–646.
Daniels, R., L. Baumhover, and C. Clark-Daniels
   1989      Physicians’ mandatory reporting of elder abuse. The Gerontologist 29:321–327.
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                                   289

Federal Bureau of Investigation
   1991      Uniform Crime Reports for the United States: 1990. Washington, DC: United
             States Government Printing Office.
Ferguson, D., and C. Beck
   1983      H.A.L.F.—A tool to assess elder abuse within the family. American Journal of
             Nursing 4:301–304.
Finkelhor, D., and K. Pillemer
   1988      Elder abuse: Its relationship to other forms of domestic violence. In Family
             Abuse and Its Consequences: New Directions in Research, G. Hotaling and D.
             Finkelhor, eds. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Floyd, J.
   1984      Collecting data on abuse of the elderly. Journal of Gerontological Nursing 10:11–
             15.
Fulmer, T.T., and V.M. Cahill
   1984      Assessing elder abuse: A study. Journal of Gerontological Nursing 10:16–20.
Fulmer, T., and T. O’Malley
   1987      Inadequate Care of the Elderly. New York: Springer.
Goodstien, R.K.
   1980      The diagnosis and treatment of elderly patients: Some practical guidelines. Hos-
             pital and Community Psychiatry 31:19–24.
Gordon, R., and S. Tomita
   1990      The reporting of elder abuse and neglect: Mandatory or voluntary. Canada’s
             Mental Health 38:1–6.
Gurland, B., J. Kuriansky, L. Sharpe, R. Simon, P. Stiller, and P. Birkett
   1978      The comprehensive assessment and referral evaluation (CARE)-rationale, devel-
             opment and reliability. International Journal of Aging and Human Development
             8:9–42.
Hanson, R.F., D.G. Kilpatrick, S.A. Falsetti, and H.S. Resnick
   1995      Violent crime and mental health. In Traumatic Stress: From Theory to Practice,
             J.R. Freedy, and S.E. Hobfoll, eds. New York: Plenum Press.
Helzer, J.E., L.N. Robins, and L. McEvoy
   1987      Post-traumatic stress disorder in the general population. New England Journal of
             Medicine 317:1630–1634.
Homer, A.C., and C. Gilleard
   1990      Abuse of elderly people by their carers. British Medical Journal 301:1359–1362.
Hooyman, T.
   1982      Intervention in Cases of Elderly Abuse within Medical Settings. Paper presented
             to the Western Gerontological Society, San Diego, CA.
Hwalek, M.A., and M.C. Sengstock
   1986      Assessing the probabilty of abuse of the elderly: Toward development of a clini-
             cal screening instrument. Journal of Applied Gerontology 5:153–173.
Hwalek, M.A., A.V. Neale, C.S. Goodrich, and K. Quinn
   1996      The association of elder abuse and substance abuse in the Illinois elder abuse
             system. The Gerontologist 36:694–700.
Jang, M., H.S. You, K. Malley-Morrison, and R. Mills
   1999      Recollections of parental acceptance and control and perceptions of elder abuse:
             Korean and American college students. Gerontology and Geriatrics Education
             19:67–80.
Johnson, D.
   1981      Abuse of the elderly. Nurse Practitioner 6(1):29–34.
290                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

Jones, G.M.
   1987     Elderly people and domestic crime. British Journal of Criminology 27:191–201.
Kallman, H.
   1987     Detecting abuse in the elderly. Medical Aspects of Human Sexuality 21:89–99.
Kilpatrick, D.G., R. Acierno, H. Resnick, B. Saunders, and C. Best
   2000     Risk factors for adolescent substance abuse: Data from a national sample. Jour-
            nal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 68:19–30.
Kilpatrick, D.G.
   1983     Special feature: Assessment and treatment of rape victims. The Clinical Psy-
            chologist 36(4).
Kilpatrick, D.G., C.S. Edmunds, and A.K. Seymour
   1992     Rape in America: A Report to the Nation. Arlington, VA: National Victims
            Center and Medical University of South Carolina.
Kilpatrick, D.G., B.E. Saunders, A. Amick-McMullan, C.L. Best, L.J. Veronen, and H.S.
Resnick
   1989     Victim and crime factors associated with the development of crime-related post-
            traumatic stress disorder. Behavior Therapy 20:199–214.
Kosberg, J.I.
   1988     Preventing elder abuse: Identification of high risk factors prior to placement
            decisions. The Gerontologist 28:43–50.
Koss, M.P., L.A. Goodman, A. Browne, and L.F. Fitzgerald, et al.
   1993     No Safe Haven: Violence Against Women at Home, at Work, and in the Commu-
            nity. Final report of the American Psychological Association Women’s Programs
            Office Task Force on Violence Against Women.
Lachs, M.S., and K. Pillemer
   1995     Abuse and neglect of elderly persons. The New England Journal of Medicine
            332:437–443.
Lachs, MS., C.S. Williams, S. O’Brien, K.A. Pillemer, and M.E. Charlson
   1998     The mortality of elder mistreatment. The Journal of the American Medical Asso-
            ciation 280:428–432.
Macolini, R.
   1995     Elder abuse policy: Considerations in research and legislation. Behavioral Sci-
            ences and the Law 13:349–363.
McCabe, K.A., and S.S. Gregory
   1998     Elderly victimization: An examination beyond the FBI’s index crimes. Research
            on Aging 20:363–372.
Moody, L.E., A. Voss, and C.A. Lengacher
   2000     Assessing abuse among the elderly living in public housing. Journal of Nursing
            Measurement 8:61–70.
Neale, A.V., M.A. Hwalek, R.O. Scott, and C. Stahl
   1991     Validation of the Hwalek-Sengstock elder abuse screening test. The Journal of
            Applied Gerontology 10:406–418.
Ouslander, J.G.
   1984     Psychiatric manifestations of physical illness in the elderly. Psychiatric Medicine
            1:63–388.
Patterson, R.L., and L.W. Dupree
   1994     Older adults. In Diagnostic Interviewing, M. Hersen, and S. M. Turner, eds.
            New York: Prentice Hall.
Paulsen, A.S., R.R. Crowe, R. Noyes, and B. Pfohl
   1988     Reliability of the telephone interview in diagnosing anxiety disorders. Archives
            of General Psychiatry 45:62–63.
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                                     291

Penhale, B.
    1993     The abuse of elderly people: Considerations for practice. British Association of
             Social Workers 23:95–112.
Phillips, L.R., and V.F. Rempusheski
    1984     A decision-making model for diagnosing and intervening in elder abuse and ne-
             glect. Nursing Research 34:134–139.
Pillemer, K., and R. Bachman-Prehn
    1991     Helping and hurting. Research on Aging 13:74–95.
Pillemer, K., and D. Finkelhor
    1988     The prevalence of elder abuse: A random sample survey. The Gerontologist
             28:51–57.
    1989     Causes of elder abuse: Caregiver stress versus problem relatives. American Jour-
             nal of Orthopsychiatry 59:179–187.
Pillemer, K., and J.J. Suitor
    1992     Violence and violent feelings: What causes them among family caregivers? Jour-
             nal of Gerontology 47:S165–S172.
Pittaway, E.D., A. Westhues, and T. Peressini
    1995     Risk factors for abuse and neglect among older adults. Canadian Journal on
             Aging 14:21–44.
Reay, A.M.C., and K.D. Browne
    2001     Risk factors characteristics in carers who physically abuse or neglect their elderly
             dependents. Aging and Mental Health 5:56–62.
Reis, M., and D. Nahmiash
    1995     Validation of the caregiver abuse screen (CASE). Canadian Journal on Aging
             14:45–60.
    1998     Validation of the indicators of abuse (IOA) screen. The Gerontologist 38:471–
             480.
Resnick, H.S., D.G. Kilpatrick, B.S. Dansky, B.E. Saunders, and C.L. Best
    1993     Prevalence of civilian trauma and PTSD in a representative national sample of
             women. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 61:984–991.
Resnick, H.S., S.A. Falsetti, D.G. Kilpatrick, and J.R. Freedy
    1996     Assessment of rape and other civilian trauma-related PTSD: Emphasis on assess-
             ment of potentially traumatic events. In Theory and Assessment of Stressful Life
             Events, T.W. Miller, ed. Madison, CT: International Universities Press.
Rudolph, M.N., and D.H. Hughes
    2001     Emergency assessments of domestic violence, sexual dangerousness, and elder
             and child abuse. Psychiatric Services 52:281–282.
Saveman, B.-I., A. Norberg, and I.R. Hallberg
    1992     The problems of dealing with abuse and neglect of the elderly: Interviews with
             district nurses. Quantitative Health Research 2:302–317.
Schiamberg, L.B., and D. Gans
    2000     Elder abuse by adult children: An applied ecological framework for understand-
             ing contextual risk factors and the intergenerational character of quality of life.
             International Journal of Aging and Human Development 50:329–359.
Sengstock, M.C., and M. Hwalek
    1986     Domestic abuse of the elderly: Which cases involve the police. Journal of Inter-
             personal Violence 1:335–349.
    1987     A review and analysis of measures for the identification of elder abuse. Journal
             of Gerontological Social Work 10:21–37.
Shiferaw, B., M.B. Mittelmark, J.L. Wofford, R.T. Anderson, P. Walls, and B. Rohrer
    1994     The investigation and outcome of reported cases of elder abuse: The Forsyth
             county aging study. The Gerontologist 34:123–126.
292                                                              ELDER MISTREATMENT

Spring, F.E., and W.N. Friedrich
    1992     Health risk behaviors and medical sequelae of childhood sexual abuse. Mayo
             Clinic Procedures 67:527–532.
Stokes, S.S., and S.E. Gordon
    1988     Development of an instrument to measure stress in the older adult. Nursing
             Research 37:16–19.
Straus, M.A.
    1979     Measuring intrafamily conflict and violence: The Conflict Tactics (CT) Scales.
             Journal of Marriage and the Family 41:75–88.
Straus, M.A., S.L. Hamby, S. Boney-McCoy, and D.B. Sugarman
    1996     The revised conflict tactics scales (CTS2). Journal of Family Issues 17:283–316.
Tatara, T.
    1997     The National Elder Abuse Incidence Study: Executive Summary. New York:
             Human Services Press.
Tomita, S.K.
    1982     Detection and treatment of elderly abuse and neglect: A protocol for health care
             professionals. Physical and Occupational Therapy in Geriatrics 2:37–51.
Tomita, S.K.
    1990     The denial of elder mistreatment by victims and abusers: The application of
             neutralization theory. Violence & Victims 5:171–184.
Utech, M., and R. Garrett
    1992     Elder and child abuse: Conceptual and perceptual parallels. Journal of Interper-
             sonal Violence 7:418–428.
Vida, S.
    1994     An update on elder abuse and neglect. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 39:S34–
             S40.
Weeks, M.F., R.A. Kulka, J.T. Lessler, and R.W. Whitmore
    1983     Personal versus telephone surveys for collecting household health data at the
             local level. American Journal of Public Health 73:1389–1394.
Weiner, A.
    1991     A community-based education model for identification and prevention of elder
             abuse. Journal of Gerontological Social Work 16:107–119.
Wetle, T.
    1986     An elder abuse assessment team in an acute hospital setting. The Gerontologist
             26:115–118.
Whittaker, T.
    1996     Violence, gender and elder abuse. In Violence and Gender Relations: Theories
             and Interventions, B. Fawcett and B. Featherston, eds. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
             Publications.
Wolf, R.S.
    1988     Elder abuse: Ten years later. Journal of American Geriatrics Society 36:758–762.
    1992     Victimization of the elderly: Elder abuse and neglect. Reviews in Clinical Geron-
             tology 2:269–276.
    1997     Elder abuse and neglect: An update. Reviews in Clinical Gerontology 7:177–182.
Wolf, R.S., and K. Pillemer
    1994     What’s new in elder abuse programming? Four bright ideas. The Gerontologist
             34:126–129.
    2000     Elder abuse and case outcome. The Journal of Applied Gerontology 19:203–220.
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                                     293

                                     APPENDIX
                                 ASSESSMENT TOOLS


From Hwalek and Sengstock (1986).


                              Elder Abuse Screening Test


    1.** Do you have anyone who spends time with you, taking you
shopping or to the doctor?3
    2.*** Are you helping to support someone?
    3.** Are you sad or lonely?
    4.* Who makes decisions about your life—like how you should live or
where you should live?
    5.*** Do you feel uncomfortable with anyone in your family?
    6.** Can you take your own medication and get around by yourself?
    7.*** Do you feel that nobody wants you around?
    8.*** Does anyone in your family drink a lot?
    9.* Does someone in your family make you stay in bed or tell you
you’re sick when you’re not?
    10.* Has anyone forced you to do things you didn’t want to do?
    11.* Has anyone taken things that belonged to you without your OK?
    12.*** Do you trust most of the people in your family?
    13.*** Does anyone tell you that you give them too much trouble?
    14.*** Do you have enough privacy at home?
    15.* Has anyone close to you tried to hurt you or harm you recently?




  3A response of “no” to items 1, 6, 12, and 14; a response of “someone else” to item 4; and
a response of “yes” to all others was scored in the “abused” direction.
  Identified factors: *violation of personal rights or direct abuse, **characteristics of vulner-
ability, and ***potentially abusive situation
294                                                 ELDER MISTREATMENT

From Fulmer and Cahill (1984).


                         Elder Assessment Tool
 1. Date________________
 2. Person completing form____________________________
 3. Patient age___________
 4. Patient sex    Male____ Female____
 5. PAYMENT STATUS         __Medicare __Private Pay     __Other
 6. RESIDENCE              __Home      __Nursing Home __Other
 7. ACCOMPANIED BY __Family            __Friend        __Alone
 8. MENTAL STATUS          __Alert      __Confused __Unresponsive
 9. REASON FOR VISIT __Orthopedic         __Changed Mental Status
__Other

GENERAL ASSESSMENT
10. Hygiene        ____yes    ____no
11. Nutrition ____good ____fair ____poor
12. Clothing ____good ____fair ____poor

USUAL LIFESTYLE
13. Maintenance of hygiene          ____self   ____assist
14. Continent of bowel/bladder      ____self   ____assist
15. Feedings                        ____self   ____assist
16. Ambulatory                      ____self   ____assist

17. ____Housebound ____Outings
18. ____Sedentary        ____Active
19. Personal contact with ____family         ____friends
     ____nursing home personnel
20. Happy with living situation           ____yes       ____no
21. Who manages finances ____self             ____family ____other?
22. Does financial arrangement work well ____yes             ____no?
23. If care provider is present, is the observed relationship
     ____good ____poor ____indifferent            ____doesn’t apply
24. History of recent life crisis ____yes         ____no     ____unsure

25. PHYSICAL ASSESSMENT (evidence of)
    ___bruising    ___lacerations                 ___abrasions
    ___diarrhea    ___urine burns                 ___decubiti
    ___dehydration ___malnutrition                ___alcohol abuse
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                  295

MEDICATIONS
26. Any duplication of similar medications? (i.e., multiple laxatives, seda-
tives, etc.) ___yes ___no
27. Any unusual doses of medications? ___yes ___no
28. If yes to #26, please comment__________________________________
29. Who gives medications? ___self ___family ___nursing home
30. If patient or family gives medications, do they have an adequate under-
standing of medications?
                      ___yes ___no

ASSESSMENT
31. Physical Abuse           ___present ___absent ___suspect/high risk
32. Psychological Abuse      ___present ___absent ___suspect/high risk
33. Material Abuse           ___present ___absent ___suspect/high risk
34. Outcome      ___Referral to Elder Abuse team
     ___Referral to Clinical Advisor
35. Summary Statement         ___Too busy to fill out
      ___No abuse/neglect suspected
296                                                            ELDER MISTREATMENT

From Reis and Nahmiash (1998).


                            INDICATORS OF ABUSE
Indicators of abuse are listed below, numbered in order of importance.4
After two- to three-hour home assessment (or other intensive assessment)
please rate each of the following items on a scale of 0 to 4. Do not omit any
items. Rate according to your current opinion.

Scale: Estimated extent of problem:               0 = nonexistent
                                                  00 = not applicable
                                                  000 = don’t know
                                                  1 = slight
                                                  2 = moderate
                                                  3 = probably/moderately severe
                                                  4 = yes/severe

      Caregiver Age ____years
      Caregiver and Care Receiver Kinship                 ___spouse
                                                          ___nonspouse
Caregiver                                            Care Receiver

__ 1. Has behavior problems                    __ 4. Has been abused in the past
__ 2. Is financially dependent                 __ 5. Has marital/family conflict
__ 3. Has mental/emotional                    __ 8. Lacks understanding of
       difficulties                                  medical condition
__ 6. Has alcohol/substance                  __ 11. Is socially isolated
       problem                               __ 15. Lacks social support
__ 7. Has unrealistic expectations           __ 16. Has behavior problems
__ 9. Lacks understanding of                 __ 18. Is financially dependent
       medical condition                      __19. Has unrealistic expectations
__ 10. Caregiver reluctancy                  __ 20. Has alcohol/medication
__ 12. Has marital/family conflict                   problem
__ 13. Has poor current                      __ 21. Has poor current
       relationship                                  relationship
__ 14. Caregiver inexperience                __ 22. Has suspicious falls/injuries
__ 17. Is a blamer                           __ 23. Has mental/emotional
__ 24. Had poor past relationship                    difficulties
                                             __ 25. Is a blamer
                                             __ 26. Is emotionally dependent
                                             __ 27. No regular doctor

 4The majority of the most important indicators are the caregiver ones.
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                             297

From Reis and Namiash (1995).


                         Caregiver Abuse Screen
Please answer the following as a helper or caregiver   YES   NO

1. Do you sometimes have trouble making (___)
   control his/her temper or aggression?               ___   ___

2. Do you often feel you are being forced to act out
   of character or do things you feel bad about?       ___   ___

3. Do you find it difficult to manage (___’s)
   behavior?                                           ___   ___

4. Do you sometimes feel that you are forced to
   be rough with (___)?                                ___   ___

5. Do you sometimes feel you can’t do what is really
   necessary or what should be done for (___)?         ___   ___

6. Do you often feel you have to reject or
   ignore (___)?                                       ___   ___

7. Do you often feel so tired and exhausted
   that you cannot meet (___’s) needs?                 ___   ___

8. Do you often feel you have to yell at (___)?        ___   ___
298                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

From Ferguson and Beck (1983).



                            HALF Assessment
HEALTH                                  Almost    Some of
                                        Always    the Time Never
1. Aged Adult Risk Dynamics
   1.1 Poor health                      _______   ________ ______
   1.2 Overly dependent
       on adult child                   _______   ________ ______
   1.3 Was extremely dependent
       on spouse who is now deceased    _______   ________ ______
   1.4 Persists in advising,
       admonishing and directing
       the adult child on whom he/she
       is dependent                     _______   ________ ______


2. Aged Adult Abuse Dynamics
   2.1 Has an unexplained or
       repeated injury                  _______   ________ ______
   2.2 Shows evidence of
       dehydration and/or
       malnutrition without
       obvious cause                    _______   ________ ______
   2.3 Has been given inappropriate
       food, drink, and/or drugs        _______   ________ ______
   2.4 Shows evidence of overall
       poor care                        _______   ________ ______


      2.5 Is notably passive and
          withdrawn                     _______   ________ ______
      2.6 Has muscle contractures due
          to being restricted           _______ ________ ______

3. Adult Child/Caregiver Risk Dynamics
   3.1 Was abused or battered
       as a child                      _______    ________ ______
   3.2 Poor self-image                 _______    ________ ______
   3.3 Limited capacity to express
       own needs                       _______    ________ ______
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                              299

HEALTH                                     Almost    Some of
                                           Always    the Time   Never

    3.4 Alcohol or drug abuser             _______   ________   ______
    3.5 Psychologically unprepared
        to meet dependency needs of
        parent                             _______   ________   ______
    3.6 Denies parent’s illness            _______   ________   ______

4. Adult Child/Caregiver Abuse Dynamics
   4.1 Shows evidence of loss of
       control, or fear of losing
       control                          _______      ________   ______
   4.2 Presents contradictory history _______        ________   ______
   4.3 Projects cause of injury
       onto third party                 _______      ________   ______
   4.4 Has delayed unduly in
       bringing the aged person in
       for care, shows detachment       _______      ________   ______
   4.5 Overreacts or underreacts to
       the seriousness of the situation _______      ________   ______
   4.6 Complains continuously
       about irrelevant problems
       unrelated to injury              _______      ________   ______
   4.7 Refuses consent for further
       diagnostic studies               _______      ________   ______

5. Attitudes Toward Aging
   5.1 Aged adult views self
        negatively due to aging process    _______   ________   ______
   5.2 Adult child views aged adult
        negatively due to aging process    _______   ________   ______
   5.3 Negative attitude toward aging      _______   ________   ______
   5.4 Adult child has unrealistic
        expectations of self or the aged
        adult                              _______   ________   ______

6. Living Arrangements
    6.1 Aged insists on maintaining
        old patterns of independent
        functioning that interfere
        with the child’s needs
        or endanger aged adult             _______   ________   ______
300                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

HEALTH                                      Almost    Some of
                                            Always    the Time      Never

    6.2 Intrusive, allows adult
        child no privacy                   _______    ________      ______
    6.3 Adult child is socially isolated   _______    ________      ______
    6.4 Has no one to provide relief
        when uptight with the
        aged person                        _______    ________      ______
    6.5 Aged adult is socially isolated    _______    ________      ______
    6.6 Has no one to provide relief
        when uptight with adult child      _______    ________      ______

7. Finances
    7.1 Aged adult uses gift money
        to control others, particularly
        adult children                     _______    ________      ______
    7.2 Refuses to apply for
        financial aid                      _______    ________      ______
    7.3 Savings have been exhausted        _______    ________      ______
    7.4 Adult child financially
        unprepared to meet dependency
        needs of aged adult                _______    ________      ______




                                 M.T.C.S.


     PLEASE COMPLETE IF YOU HAVE HAD A ROMANTIC PART-
NER IN THE PAST YEAR. No matter how well a couple gets along, there
are times when they disagree on major decisions, get annoyed about some-
thing the other person does, or just have spats or fights because they are in
a bad mood or tired or for some other reason. They also use many different
ways of trying to settle their differences. The following is a list of some
things that you and your partner or spouse might have done when you had
a dispute.

    For each item on the list, please check the box that indicates how often
each has occurred in the past year.
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY                                             301

                                                                               More
                                                                               Than
                                 Never   Once   Twice   3–5     6–10    11–20 20
                                                        Times   Times    Times Times

1.   A. Have you discussed
        the issue calmly         o       o      o       o       o       o      o
     B. Has your spouse
        discussed the issue
        calmly                   o       o      o       o       o       o      o

2.   A. Have you gotten
        information to back
        up your side of things  o        o      o       o       o       o      o
     B. Has your spouse/partner
        gotten information      o        o      o       o       o       o      o

4.   A. Have you tried to bring
        in someone to help settle
        things                    o      o      o       o       o       o      o
     B. Has your spouse/partner o        o      o       o       o       o      o

5.   A. Have you insulted or
        sworn at your spouse/
        partner                 o        o      o       o       o       o      o
     B. Has your spouse/partner o        o      o       o       o       o      o

6.   A. Have you sulked and/or
        refused to talk about it o       o      o       o       o       o      o
     B. Has your spouse/partner o        o      o       o       o       o      o

7.   A. Have you stomped out
        of the room, house, or
        yard                    o        o      o       o       o       o      o
     B. Has your spouse/partner o        o      o       o       o       o      o

8.   A. Have you cried           o       o      o       o       o       o      o
     B. Has your spouse/
        partner cried            o       o      o       o       o       o      o

9.   A. Have you done or
        said something to spite
        your spouse/partner     o        o      o       o       o       o      o
     B. Has your spouse/partner o        o      o       o       o       o      o

13. A. Have you threatened
       to hit or throw
       something at your
       spouse/partner          o         o      o       o       o       o      o
    B. Has your spouse/partner o         o      o       o       o       o      o
302                                                      ELDER MISTREATMENT

                                                                            More
                                                                            Than
                              Never   Once   Twice   3–5     6–10    11–20 20
                                                     Times   Times    Times Times
14. A. Have you thrown,
       smashed, hit, kicked
       something               o      o      o       o       o       o      o
    B. Has your spouse/partner o      o      o       o       o       o      o


15. A. Have you hit or
       tried to hit your
       spouse with something o        o      o       o       o       o      o
    B. Has your spouse/partner o      o      o       o       o       o      o


16. A. Have you thrown
       something at your
       spouse/partner          o      o      o       o       o       o      o
    B. Has your spouse/partner o      o      o       o       o       o      o

17. A. Have you pushed,
       grabbed, or shoved
       your spouse/partner     o      o      o       o       o       o      o
    B. Has your spouse/partner o      o      o       o       o       o      o

18. A. Have you slapped
       your spouse/partner     o      o      o       o       o       o      o
    B. Has your spouse/partner o      o      o       o       o       o      o

19. A. Have you kicked, bit,
       or hit your spouse/
       partner with a fist     o      o      o       o       o       o      o
    B. Has your spouse/partner o      o      o       o       o       o      o

22. A. Have you beat up
       your spouse/partner     o      o      o       o       o       o      o
    B. Has your spouse/partner o      o      o       o       o       o      o

23. A. Have you threatened
       spouse/partner with a
       knife or gun            o      o      o       o       o       o      o
    B. Has your spouse/partner o      o      o       o       o       o      o

24. A. Have you used a knife
       or gun on your spouse/
       partner                 o      o      o       o       o       o      o
    B. Has your spouse/partner o      o      o       o       o       o      o
                                          11

 Ethical and Policy Issues in Research on
         Elder Abuse and Neglect
                               Rebecca Dresser*




                          R  esearch on elder abuse and neglect poses a mul-
titude of challenges. Besides presenting methodological and practical diffi-
culties, studying maltreatment of older people raises formidable ethical and
policy problems. Two general features of the research account for these
problems. First, the study population includes older persons with various
mental, physical, and social vulnerabilities. Second, the research involves
collecting information that could have negative legal, financial, and social
consequences for the older persons and caregivers being studied.
     The ethical and policy analysis is further complicated by an absence of
regulatory guidance and ethical consensus regarding the appropriate proce-
dures to govern research involving persons who lack the ability to decide
about research participation. A similar lack of guidance exists regarding
the conduct of research in nursing homes and other residential facilities.
Finally, current policy and ethics fail to resolve many questions about the
appropriate approach to research seeking legally and socially sensitive in-
formation.
     In this paper, I address ethical and policy issues raised by research on
elder abuse and neglect. I use as a framework for ethical analysis the
Belmont Report, a document that identifies ethical principles and guidelines



  *Rebecca Dresser, J.D., M.S., is the Daniel Noyes Kirby Professor of Law, Washington
University School of Law, and Professor of Ethics in Medicine, Washington Univesity School
of Medicine.

                                          303
304                                                           ELDER MISTREATMENT

for research involving human participants1 (National Commission for the
Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research,
1979). I use as a framework for policy analysis the Federal Policy for the
Protection of Human Subjects (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 1991), also known as the Common Rule. My analysis reviews
general issues relevant to research on elder abuse and neglect. Because
states vary in their approaches to regulating disclosures of private informa-
tion, professional reporting duties, nursing home operations, and other
relevant topics, issues raised by individual research projects must be sepa-
rately evaluated by local institutional review boards (IRBs) and attorneys.
     The Belmont Report describes the characteristic features of research
involving human participants and articulates three ethical principles that
apply to such research. These principles are (1) respect for persons, (2)
beneficence, and (3) justice. The principle of respect for persons underlies
the requirement for informed consent to study participation. The principle
of beneficence underlies the requirement to evaluate and balance risks and
expected benefits in human studies. The principle of justice addresses
fairness in selection of research participants. Provisions in the Common
Rule incorporate these Belmont Report principles and requirements.
     Institutional review boards rely heavily on the Belmont Report and
Common Rule when they evaluate research proposals. Thus, studies on
elder abuse and neglect must take into account the concepts and consider-
ations in these documents. Although the Department of Health and Hu-
man Services has adopted additional regulations to cover certain popula-
tions deemed especially vulnerable in research, it has no special regulations
governing research involving older persons, persons with impaired decision
making capacity, or residents of nursing homes and other institutions.
Various individuals and groups have, however, made recommendations
addressing ethical issues with particular relevance to these populations.
     In addition, the Common Rule contains a few provisions that specifi-
cally bear on vulnerable populations in research. The Rule directs IRBs to
“be particularly cognizant of the special problems of research involving
vulnerable populations” and to ensure that “[w]hen some or all of the
subjects are likely to be vulnerable to coercion or undue influence, . . .
additional safeguards have been included in the study to protect the rights
and welfare of these subjects” (1991:28,016). The Common Rule advises
IRBs that regularly review research involving a vulnerable subject popula-
tion to consider including “one or more individuals who are knowledgeable
about and experienced in working with these subjects” (1991:28,015).


  1In this paper, I use both the newer term “research participant” and the traditional term
“research subject” to refer to persons from whom research data are collected.
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                     305

     In considering the issues raised by research involving elder abuse and
neglect, one should keep in mind certain characteristics of U.S. policy gov-
erning research involving human subjects. Ethical principles and federal
regulations establish a general framework for analyzing research proposals.
In the current system, local IRBs, as well as funding agencies, interpret and
apply the general principles and regulations to specific studies. The over-
sight system is based on the judgment that studies are sufficiently different
and complex that it would be difficult (and probably futile) to set rules for
every possible situation. Moreover, the current system reflects the
government’s desire to avoid a centralized approach in which federal offi-
cials are responsible for reviewing study proposals. Instead, the system is
designed to allow staff at the local institution and people from the local
community to decide how the general principles should apply to individual
studies. One inevitable consequence of this system is variation in IRB
decisions addressing matters not definitively resolved by the federal regula-
tions.


   WHICH PROJECTS ARE GOVERNED BY RESEARCH ETHICS
           PRINCIPLES AND FEDERAL POLICY?
    An initial task is to determine which projects qualify as research and
which research projects are covered by the Common Rule. Not all informa-
tion gathering and interventions related to elder abuse and neglect involve
research. Moreover, some research is exempt from federal oversight. The
Belmont Report and the Common Rule address, but do not fully resolve,
these classification issues.


  Distinguishing Research from Other Information Gathering Activities
     Underlying the research oversight system is the judgment that research
presents particular ethical concerns. Past incidents illustrate that the rights
and interests of participants may be compromised in research. As a result,
individuals are owed certain special protections in research that may not be
required in other data-collection contexts. The Common Rule and its
underlying principles are intended to cover the process of producing gener-
alizable knowledge, an activity that society labels desirable but not so
important that people should be compelled to participate (Pritchard, 2000).
A project’s classification as research determines the nature of ethical and
policy scrutiny it receives.
     Data collection can occur in numerous contexts, including patient care,
social services, public health, and program evaluation contexts. These
activities fall under the general heading of practice and are not covered by
the research oversight system. At the same time, these activities may be
306                                                         ELDER MISTREATMENT

combined with research. When they are, they should undergo the same
ethical and policy assessment as other research projects.
     The Belmont Report relies primarily on the different goals of research
and practice to distinguish the two activities. Medical and behavioral
clinicians gather information or perform interventions to advance the inter-
ests of individual patients or clients. Researchers, on the other hand, collect
data and perform interventions “to test an hypothesis, permit conclusions
to be drawn, and thereby to develop or contribute to generalizable knowl-
edge” (National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Bio-
medical and Behavioral Research, 1979:3). Like the Belmont Report, the
Common Rule’s definition of research looks primarily to the intended aim
of the activity. According to the Common Rule, “[r]esearch means a sys-
tematic investigation, including research development, testing, and evalua-
tion, designed to develop or contribute to generalized knowledge” (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 1991:28,013).
     The National Bioethics Advisory Commission (NBAC) recently called
attention to flaws in the Common Rule definition. The NBAC observed
that the definition omits the additional important point that research is
done primarily to benefit society, while practice activities primarily aim to
benefit patients, clients, or specific populations. In this respect, the NBAC
noted, the Common Rule definition fails to recognize the possible conflict
of interest that “always exists between investigators’ desires to pursue
knowledge and their obligation to protect the rights and welfare of research
participants” (2001:35). Moreover, the NBAC noted that the Common
Rule definition provides little assistance to those seeking to distinguish
research from activities such as public health and quality improvement
projects.
     As a result of these regulatory shortcomings, it can be difficult to
determine when various data-gathering activities should be considered re-
search. Three authors addressing this problem suggested that as a general
rule, “[r]esearch projects are done to change the way the [health or social
services] community thinks about a specific issue,” while “[n]onresearch
investigations are done to give a specific group the information they need to
make a specific decision” (Amdur et al., 2000).
     Consistent with this approach, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention Guidelines for Defining Public Health Research and Public
Health Non-Research (1999) provide as follows:
      The major difference between research and nonresearch lies in the prima-
      ry intent of the activity. The primary intent of research is to generate or
      contribute to generalizable knowledge. The primary intent of nonresearch
      in public health is to prevent or control disease or injury and improve
      health, or to improve a public health program or service. Knowledge may
      be gained in any public health endeavor designed to prevent disease or
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                             307

    injury or improve a program or service. In some cases, that knowledge
    may be generalizable, but the primary intention of the endeavor is to
    benefit clients participating in a public health program or a population by
    controlling a health problem in the population from which the informa-
    tion is gathered (1999).
     Similarly, a health care organization’s quality improvement efforts typi-
cally combine review of patient care data with a commitment to take cor-
rective action if the findings warrant. When this commitment is absent, the
organization’s information gathering is conducted primarily to benefit oth-
ers and ought to receive the ethical scrutiny appropriate to a research
project (Bellin and Dubler, 2001).
     When public-health, quality-improvement, and other data-gathering
projects have both research and practice objectives, they should be classi-
fied as research. Although individual participants or populations may di-
rectly benefit from their involvement in such projects, they also are sub-
jected to such measures as structured interviews, intrusions on privacy,
and potentially distressing questions to advance the aim of collecting gen-
eralizable data. When the aim of collecting generalizable data exposes
individuals to risks or burdens not present in standard practice, an activity
should be evaluated in the research oversight system (Cassarett et al.,
2000). Because participants in such activities fail to receive services tai-
lored to their individual needs and interests, and because the dominant
goal is to produce knowledge for the benefit of others, these activities
present risks and inconveniences to participants that are not typically
present in the practice setting.


 Determining Which Research Projects Are Subject to Federal Oversight
     Determining whether a project involves research is just the first step in
evaluating the project’s ethical and policy status. Not all activities that
qualify as research are regulated by the federal government. The Common
Rule explicitly applies only to research performed or funded by federal
agencies that have adopted the Rule (U.S. Department of Health and Hu-
man Services, 1991:28,012). One of the Rule’s provisions seeks to extend
this coverage, however, by requiring all institutions receiving federal re-
search support to “protect the rights and welfare of human subjects of
research conducted at or sponsored by the institution, regardless of whether
the research is subject to federal regulation” (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, 1991:28,014). In addition, some research conducted
in the private sector is subject to explicit federal oversight. In separate
regulations, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (1999) requires manu-
facturers seeking agency approval for their products to conform their stud-
308                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

ies to provisions similar to those in the Common Rule. Certain states also
have laws regulating the conduct of human studies (Glantz, 1992).
     The Common Rule itself excludes certain research activities from its
coverage. The Rule applies only to “research involving human subjects”
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1991:28,012). Accord-
ing to the Rule, “human subject” is “a living individual about whom an
investigator . . . conducting research obtains (1) data through intervention
or interaction with the individual, or (2) identifiable private information”
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1991:28,013). Accord-
ing to the Rule, information is private if it concerns “behavior that occurs
in a context in which an individual can reasonably expect that no observa-
tion or recording is taking place” (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 1991:28,013). The Rule also classifies as private personal infor-
mation that is collected for a particular purpose and that the individual
reasonably believes will not be publicly disclosed, such as a medical record.
When access to medical records or other private information would enable
an investigator to readily determine the identity of a person, obtaining such
information qualifies as research involving human subjects.
     The Common Rule’s definition of research involving human subjects
incorporates certain ethical judgments. First, if data are publicly available,
researchers may use them without securing the permission of the individu-
als being studied (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
1991:28,012). For example, elder abuse and neglect research that involves
the examination of public records, such as court or police records, is ex-
empt from the Common Rule provisions. Second, if the information is not
publicly available, researchers may gain access without a person’s permis-
sion as long as that person cannot be individually identified (U.S. Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services, 1991:28,012).2 For example, elder
abuse and neglect studies involving the examination of medical records
lacking individual identifiers would be exempt from the Common Rule’s
coverage. Another provision of the Common Rule exempts from its cover-
age surveys and interviews in which no identifying information is recorded
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1991:28,012).
     In adopting these provisions, federal officials determined that a person’s
privacy interests do not extend to certain kinds of information (King, 1995).
The Common Rule makes investigators and IRBs responsible for deciding
whether people have reasonable expectations that personal information is




  2Also exempt is research “in established or commonly accepted educational settings involv-
ing normal educational practices,” research evaluating or examining public benefit or service
programs, and research on food quality (1991:28,012).
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                     309

private and when access to private information would enable investigators
to identify individuals.


             RESPECT FOR PERSONS IN RESEARCH ON
                  ELDER ABUSE AND NEGLECT
    The Belmont Report’s principle of respect for persons expresses the
moral judgment that no one should be used in research purely as a means to
benefit others. In essence, the principle gives protection of individual rights
and welfare priority over any medical or social benefits research might
generate.
    The Belmont Report describes two elements of the principle of respect
for persons. The first element is that individuals capable of autonomous
decision making should be permitted to make their own choices about
whether to participate in research. To enable individuals to make autono-
mous choices, investigators must disclose important facts about a study,
ensure that prospective participants understand that information, and en-
sure that decisions to enroll are not a response to undue pressures or
incentives.
    The second element of the principle is that individuals with impaired
decision making capacities should be protected from harm in the research
process. This dimension of the principle is reflected in legal requirements
preventing investigators from enrolling decisionally incapable individuals
in research without the informed consent of a family member or other
appropriate person. Adequate protection may also require investigators to
exclude decisionally incapable individuals from certain risky or burden-
some studies that are permissible when conducted with capable, consenting
individuals.


      Standards and Procedures for Evaluating Decisional Capacity
     Central to applying the principle of respect for persons is the determi-
nation of whether a prospective research participant can make autonomous
decisions about study participation. Because capacity determinations have
significant moral implications, evaluators must strive to avoid erroneous
classifications. Treating a decisionally capable person as incapable leads to
a demeaning and unjustified deprivation of that person’s right to decide
whether research participation would be consistent with his or her particu-
lar values and preferences. Treating a decisionally incapable person as
capable exposes that person to exploitation to advance the interests of
those who benefit from the research enterprise.
     In research on elder abuse and neglect, both types of errors can have
serious consequences. Delegating research decision-making authority to
310                                                         ELDER MISTREATMENT

another individual can be especially problematic in this context, in light of
the difficulties that may arise in selecting an appropriate research represen-
tative. Moreover, research on abuse and neglect can expose vulnerable
individuals to physical, psychological, social, and other risks that ought not
be assumed by someone who is unable to comprehend them or is acting in
response to perceived pressure from others.
     Although no single definition is enshrined in research ethics and policy,
agreement exists on the basic features of decisional capacity. According to
Paul Appelbaum and Thomas Grisso (1988), four abilities are relevant to
decision-making capacity: (1) ability to communicate a choice, (2) ability to
understand relevant information, (3) ability to appreciate how this infor-
mation applies to one’s current and future situation, and (4) ability to give
comprehensible reasons for a decision. Similarly, a Hastings Center group
considering capacity to decide about life-sustaining treatment declared that
a “patient has the capacity to make the treatment decision when he or she
can understand the relevant information, reflect on it in accordance with
his or her values, and communicate with caregivers” (1987:23).
     The presence or absence of a dementia diagnosis fails to indicate
whether someone has the necessary abilities to make choices about study
participation. Similarly, although they may furnish preliminary guidance,
simple mental status assessments are insufficient to determine whether some-
one is able to make autonomous research decisions. Instead, investigators
should evaluate decisional capacity in the context of the specific study being
proposed.
     In the research setting, decision-making capacity should be assessed
through a discussion of the facts relevant to the particular choice facing a
prospective participant. At minimum, a prospective participant should
demonstrate the ability to “understand the purpose, procedures, risks, ben-
efits, and alternatives to participation in the study (including nonparticipa-
tion), express a choice about participation; and understand that refusal to
participate involves no penalty or loss of benefits to which the person
should otherwise be entitled” (Advisory Work Group on Human Subject
Research, 1998:23). In this respect, assessing a person’s decision-making
capacity goes hand in hand with assessing that person’s understanding of
the important study information:
      The concepts of capacity and adequate information are intertwined. To
      be informed, a subject must be cognitively capable of understanding the
      relevant facts about the decision at hand. To determine whether a subject
      has the requisite cognitive capacity, the examiner must disclose these facts
      and then ascertain the subject’s level of comprehension (Dresser, 1996:68).
   As the NBAC pointed out, “our society has not decided what degree of
impairment counts as a lack of decision making capacity” (1998:10). Many
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                   311

groups support a sliding-scale approach to evaluating a person’s capacity to
decide about research. According to this approach, capacity standards may
be lower in research presenting comparatively low risk, while a higher level
of decisional ability should be required for research that presents compara-
tively high risks, particularly when the research fails to offer participants
the prospect of direct benefit (NBAC, 1998:24).
     The assessment process itself can be conducted using a variety of meth-
ods. The simplest method is to ask prospective participants to describe
briefly and in their own words the basic study information noted above
(Wendler and Prasad, 2001). Richard Bonnie has suggested as options
“specially tailored follow-up questions to assess subject understanding, vid-
eotaping or audiotaping of consent interviews, second opinions, use of
consent specialists, or concurrent consent by a family member” (1997:110).
The device of concurrent consent is often adopted in dementia research
when prospective participants have uncertain or fluctuating decisional ca-
pacity (High et al., 1994). This will not always be an option in studies on
elder abuse and neglect, but it could be feasible in some such studies.
Another suggestion is to adopt a two-part consent process, in which rel-
evant study information is presented and the prospective participant is then
asked questions about the study. If the individual exhibits a lack of ad-
equate comprehension, the information is presented again, and the indi-
vidual is reexamined (Ratzan, 1985). Such a process can detect individuals
with problematic memory or other incapacitating cognitive deficits.
     The capacity examination should enable researchers to ascertain when
someone lacks the requisite abilities to make an autonomous choice about
study participation. For people who appear to have adequate decision-
making capacity, the next step is to ensure that they actually understand the
significant information relevant to becoming a study participant.


                    Informed Choices About Research
     People deciding to enter a study should understand certain facts. The
Belmont Report lists the following general items essential for investigators
to describe: “the research procedure[s], their purposes, risks, and antici-
pated benefits, alternative procedures (where therapy is involved), and a
statement offering the subject the opportunity to ask questions and to
withdraw at any time from the research” (National Commission for the
Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research,
1979:5). The Report describes the following risks, each of which is specifi-
cally relevant to elder abuse and neglect research: “psychological harm,
physical harm, legal harm, social harm, and economic harm” (National
Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Be-
havioral Research, 1979:7).
312                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

     The Common Rule includes a more detailed list of the information that
prospective participants should understand. Two items are particularly
relevant to research on elder abuse and neglect. First, researchers must
describe “the extent, if any, to which confidentiality of records identifying
the subject will be maintained” (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 1991:28,016). Second, if the research presents more than minimal
risk, prospective subjects must be told whether compensation or treatment,
or both, will be available if injury occurs (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, 1991:28,016).
     Helping prospective participants to achieve adequate understanding is
no small task. Surveys and interviews indicate that an appreciable number
of people fail to understand important information about the studies in
which they participate. A major problem is that participants often mistak-
enly think that studies are done primarily for their individual benefit, rather
than to advance knowledge (Kass and Sugarman, 1996). The challenges
may be especially great in research on elder abuse and neglect, given the
educational levels and health problems of many prospective participants.
Researchers could also encounter difficulties in ensuring that participants
understand when elder abuse and neglect studies offer them no direct per-
sonal benefit.
     Besides the methods described previously in the discussion of capacity
assessment, investigators may enhance participants’ comprehension by us-
ing graphics, videotapes, and other creative approaches to information
disclosure (Sachs and Cassel, 1990). The NBAC suggested additional mea-
sures to enhance prospective participants’ understanding. These include
the use of translators when investigators and participants speak different
languages, seeking advice from representatives of study populations regard-
ing the appropriate content and presentation of information to prospective
participants, and focusing less on the consent form and more on ensuring
an effective disclosure and decision-making process (2001:88, 100).


                    Voluntary Choices About Research
    According to the Belmont Report, decisions to enroll in research are
voluntary if they occur in the absence of coercion or undue influence.
Coercion exists “when an overt threat of harm is intentionally presented by
one person to another in order to obtain compliance.” Undue influence
exists when there is “an offer of an excessive, unwarranted, inappropriate,
or improper reward or other overture in order to obtain compliance” (Na-
tional Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and
Behavioral Research, 1979:6).
    A variety of factors may compromise the voluntariness of decisions to
participate in elder abuse and neglect research. Older people who depend
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                     313

on health and social services professionals for assistance may agree to
participate out of a desire to preserve good relationships. Older people may
fear they will lose needed services if they refuse to participate. Residents of
nursing homes may be especially vulnerable to these pressures. Offers of
monetary or other incentives for study participation may also be unduly
tempting to economically disadvantaged people.
     The NBAC suggested ways to address some of these problems. This
group’s suggestions were to discuss possible research participation out of
the presence of those to whom the prospective participant usually defers
and to design studies so that staff in residential facilities are unaware which
individuals are participating (2001:89). Others suggest that research dis-
cussions with nursing home residents be conducted in private and that the
residents’ own physician and nurses not be involved in conducting the
research (Sachs et al., 1993). If a physician is conducting research, the
Helsinki Declaration urges particular caution and advises that in such a
case, “the informed consent should be obtained by a well-informed physi-
cian who is not engaged in the investigation and who is completely indepen-
dent of this relationship” (World Medical Association, 2000:3044).


       Procedures for Assessing the Quality of Research Decisions
    Investigators must adopt procedures for determining whether research
choices are sufficiently capable, informed, and voluntary. At minimum,
investigators should develop an assessment plan and the IRB should review
that plan. Some individuals and advisory groups believe the assessment
should be performed by a qualified professional not otherwise involved in
the research. This proposal responds to the concern that researchers eager
to enlist participants may be insufficiently demanding about the level of
capacity, understanding, and voluntariness necessary to consent.
    Some groups say that IRBs should be authorized to decide when inde-
pendent evaluations are needed in specific studies. The NBAC declared
that when research proposals present greater than minimal risk, IRBs ordi-
narily “should require that an independent, qualified professional assess the
potential subject’s capacity to consent” (1998:58). In such cases, the pro-
posal “should describe who will conduct the assessment and the nature of
the assessment” (1998:58).
    Although the use of independent evaluators will add to the costs of a
study, supporters contend that the costs are justified by the need to protect
individual rights and welfare. This is particularly true, they say, when
individuals are asked to join studies that will expose them to significant risk
(Dresser, 2001a).
314                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

                           Decisionally Incapable Persons
     The screening process may identify individuals lacking decisional ca-
pacity. According to the principle of respect for persons, individuals inca-
pable of autonomous choice should be protected from harm in the research
process. Conferring such protection may require excluding them from
research altogether, or excluding them from studies that present relatively
high risk, approaches that are discussed below. If decisionally incapable
individuals are considered for research participation, special protective
measures are warranted. The most common protective safeguards are (1)
to designate as a research decision maker someone “likely to understand
the incompetent subject’s situation and to act in that person’s best interest”
(National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical
and Behavioral Research, 1979), and (2) to require the decisionally inca-
pable person’s assent or lack of objection to study participation.


Selection of a Research Representative
     The Common Rule allows a decisionally incapable person’s “legally
authorized representative” to consent to that individual’s research partici-
pation, as long as the representative’s consent is adequately informed and
voluntary. The Rule fails to specify who may assume the position of
representative; instead, it refers generally to “an individual or judicial or
other body authorized under applicable law to consent on behalf of a
prospective subject to the subject’s participation in the procedure[s] in-
volved in the research” (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
1991:28,013).
     State laws provide for the appointment of legal guardians to make
personal and financial decisions for individuals a court has declared legally
incompetent. Some states also have laws explicitly authorizing courts,
guardians, or family members to act as research decision makers, but many
states lack clear rules in this area (Hoffman and Schwartz, 1998). In states
without clear rules, possible decision makers include a court-appointed
guardian, an individual the currently incapable person previously chose as a
research or health care decision maker (also known as a research or health
care proxy decision maker), or a relative or close friend of the decisionally
incapable person (also known as a surrogate decision maker).3
     In practice, people from all three of these groups make research choices


   3Although research advance directives and proxies are sometimes discussed as possible
mechanisms for authorizing research involving decisionally incapable individuals, it seems
highly unlikely that competent persons will complete directives that authorize participation in
research on elder abuse and neglect.
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                                 315

for decisionally incapable individuals. Indeed, relatives acting as informal
surrogates are probably the most common research decision makers for
older people unable to make their own choices. Limiting research decision
making to court-appointed guardians is generally seen as burdensome,
expensive, and unnecessary to supply adequate protection. Because guard-
ianship proceedings typically fail to examine a prospective guardian’s quali-
fications to act as a research decision maker, such proceedings are an
ineffective research safeguard. Moreover, court-appointed guardians may
be strangers lacking knowledge of an incapable person’s current situation
and former values and preferences.
     At the same time, the practice of relying on informal surrogates for
research decision making raises its own concerns. The primary worry is
that such surrogates may have personal interests that conflict with those of
the prospective research subject (Dresser, 1996). Conflicts of interest are
an obvious possibility in research on elder abuse and neglect, particularly
when an abusive or neglectful relative acts as the surrogate decision maker
for an older incapable participant.
     Investigators should make every effort to select research representatives
genuinely concerned with the decisionally incapable individual’s welfare.
One way to do this is to conduct screening and education of potential
representatives, with the aim of detecting inappropriate decision makers
and increasing the odds that those chosen will adequately protect research
participants’ interests. Another is to ensure that the incapable person’s
research representative will not be the person asked to supply information
relevant to abuse and neglect.
     The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services regulations on
research involving children suggest a third possible response to the conflict
of interest problem. The regulations provide as follows:
    if the IRB determines that a research protocol is designed for conditions
    or for a subject population for which parental or guardian permission is
    not a reasonable requirement to protect the subjects (for example, neglect-
    ed or abused children), it may waive the [usual parental] consent require-
    ments . . . provided an appropriate mechanism for protecting the children
    who will participate as subjects in the research is substituted, and . . . that
    the waiver is not inconsistent with federal, state, or local law (1999,
    §46.408(c)).
     The regulations also state that the “choice of an appropriate mecha-
nism would depend upon the nature and purpose of the activities described
in the protocol, the risk and anticipated benefit to the research subjects, and
their age, maturity, status, and condition” (1999, §46.408(c)).
     In discussing this research situation, the National Commission for the
316                                                                 ELDER MISTREATMENT

Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research sug-
gested the following option:
      to appoint a social worker, pediatric nurse, or physician to act as surro-
      gate parent when the research is designed, for example, to study neglected
      or battered children. Such surrogate parents would be expected to partic-
      ipate not only in the process of soliciting the children’s cooperation but
      also in the conduct of the research, in order to provide reassurance for the
      subject and to intervene or support their desire to withdraw if participa-
      tion becomes too stressful (National Commission for the Protection of
      Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1975:19).
     An analogous approach might be adopted in studies of elder abuse and
neglect involving decisionally incapable adults. Major considerations would
be whether it would be justifiable or practical to withhold information
about the appointment of such a designated surrogate from a close family
member suspected of abuse. As two authors addressing the child abuse
research regulation noted, “removing the parent’s decision-making author-
ity will not assuage a child’s concerns about the consequences of disclosure,
or prevent a parent from vigorously asking a child about what was dis-
cussed in interviews . . .” (King and Churchill, 2000:722). Similar concerns
could arise in research involving older adults with impaired decisional ca-
pacity. Other important considerations would be the study’s potential risks
and direct benefits, variables that are addressed in the section on benefi-
cence in research on elder abuse and neglect.4


Assent and Absence of Objection
    Decisionally incapable persons ought not be completely excluded from
research decision making. According to the Belmont Report, the principle
of respect for persons “requires giving [such persons] the opportunity to
choose to the extent they are able, whether or not to participate in re-


    4It appears that the regulatory provision has rarely, if ever, been applied. My review of the
literature failed to yield any discussion of the use of a surrogate parent or other alternative to
parental or guardian consent in child abuse and neglect research. Moreover, neither an
inquiry to the Department of Health and Human Services Office of Human Research Protec-
tions nor a request to subscribers to the major IRB listserv produced any reports of studies in
which these alternatives were adopted.
   One individual did report that his IRB had appointed an independent advocate for child
research participants in foster care and other out-of-home placements, based on another
provision of the pediatric research regulations that deals with children who are wards of the
state or other institutions. The appointments had to be approved by the child’s legal guard-
ian. He noted that they had encountered several problems in determining the appropriate
role for the advocate, as well as how to cover the costs of this mechanism.
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                     317

search” (National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of
Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1979:6). This requirement has two
components. One is to supply information and help decisionally incapable
persons understand as much as they can about the proposed study experi-
ence. The other is to respect their verbal or physical opposition to partici-
pation.
    The assent requirement is met when a decisionally incapable person
verbally agrees to cooperate with study procedures. The lack of objection
requirement is met when a decisionally incapable person fails to indicate
verbal or physical opposition to study participation. Assent or lack of
objection alone is insufficient to authorize an incapable person’s research
participation; the informed and voluntary permission of the legally autho-
rized representative is required as well. The presence of the decisionally
incapable person’s assent or lack of objection is an additional precondition
to proceeding with research.
    The demand for assent or lack of objection rests on the moral judgment
that vulnerable incapable individuals ought not be forced to contribute to
the generation of knowledge for the benefit of others. Instead, imposed
interventions are warranted solely when they are absolutely necessary to
protect the objecting individual’s personal welfare.
    These moral judgments account for the current view that assent or lack
of objection are mandatory in nearly all studies seeking the involvement of
decisionally incapable persons. The one possible exception arises when
research offers participants a direct health or behavioral benefit unavailable
outside the research context. The rationale is that in this situation, “the
decision is more akin to a treatment decision, and thus incompetent refusals
may be overridden in some cases” (Berg, 1996:24). Although some indi-
viduals and groups support such an exception, others question its justifica-
tion. As one group noted, “it is difficult to equate an intervention which is
investigative in nature—with an intervention ‘which would be ordered in a
purely therapeutic context’” (Keyserlingk et al., 1995:342). Compelling
direct benefit would be necessary to justify including actively resisting inca-
pable individuals in research on elder abuse and neglect.


    Exceptions to the Requirement for Informed Consent to Research
    The Belmont Report acknowledges that imposing the customary in-
formed consent requirements could eliminate or seriously impede some
research projects. The Report suggests that incomplete information disclo-
sure could be acceptable under certain circumstances. This view is incorpo-
rated in a Common Rule provision permitting exceptions to the general
requirements for informed consent. An investigator seeking IRB approval
to omit or alter information that must ordinarily be disclosed, or to waive
318                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

the informed consent requirement altogether, must establish that (1) par-
ticipants will be exposed to no more than minimal risk, (2) waiving or
altering informed consent “will not adversely affect the rights and welfare
of the subjects,” (3) the study would be impracticable if the information
had to be disclosed, and (4) in appropriate cases, the withheld information
will be disclosed at the end of the study (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, 1991:28,016).
     According to the Belmont Report, withholding information is never
justified simply to make it easier to enroll participants. Instead, withhold-
ing should be permitted only if full disclosure would “destroy or invalidate
the research” (National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects
of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1979:6). This suggests that IRBs
should be rigorous in demanding investigators show that their studies would
be impracticable if the usual informed consent requirements were applied.
     An investigator proposing a study on elder abuse and neglect might
seek to withhold information about the study, such as its purpose or risks,
from prospective participants or research representatives. For example, an
investigator might propose to omit from the consent discussion and form a
statement that evidence of possible abuse or neglect will trigger a referral to
the appropriate adult protective services agency. The investigator might
argue that disclosure of this information would generate too many refusals
to participate or distort the responses of those who agree to participate.
Another example would be an investigator who sought to modify the study
description so that prospective participants would be unaware that its focus
was elder abuse or neglect.
     Withholding study information from prospective participants compro-
mises their right to make informed research decisions. Thus, it should be
done only for compelling reasons. One relevant IRB consideration in the
above examples would be the degree of risk that the proposed study would
create for participants. If study procedures would expose participants to
more than minimal risk, the IRB ought not approve the information with-
holding. (This topic is discussed in greater detail in the section on balancing
harms and benefits in research, below.) The IRB would also need to evalu-
ate the investigator’s claim that full disclosure would make the research
impracticable.
     Surprisingly, data from a study of parents’ and teenagers’ preferences
suggest that disclosure of reporting plans might actually be a positive factor
in participant recruitment. O’Sullivan and Fisher found that parents and
adolescents would be more willing to enroll in studies on abuse and related
behaviors if the investigator planned to notify the parents or help the child
obtain independent assistance for any problems discovered in the course of
the study (O’Sullivan and Fisher, 1997). These data suggest that IRBs
should require persuasive evidence that research will be unduly compro-
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                                319

mised before granting requests to withhold information from prospective
participants in elder abuse and neglect studies.


                                    Conclusion
    Choices to participate in research on elder abuse and neglect should be
capable, informed, and voluntary. When someone is unable to make valid
decisions to participate, researchers should obtain the capable, informed,
and voluntary permission of a relative or other individual concerned with
protecting the incapable person’s well-being. Researchers should also seek
the willing cooperation of the decisionally incapable person. Departures
from these rules require compelling justification, including a showing that
research interventions will not expose participants to significant risk.


 BENEFICENCE IN RESEARCH ON ELDER ABUSE AND NEGLECT
     The Belmont Report describes two dimensions of the beneficence prin-
ciple in research. One is to avoid harm to study participants, and the other
is to maximize possible benefits and minimize possible harms. Risks to
research participants cannot be completely avoided. Instead, those evaluat-
ing the ethics of proposed studies must “decide when it is justifiable to seek
certain benefits despite the risks involved, and when the benefits should be
forgone because of the risks” (National Commission for the Protection of
Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1979:4)
     Two Common Rule provisions incorporate the beneficence principle.
The first provision directs researchers to minimize risks to participants
through the use of procedures that are “consistent with sound research
design,” do not impose “unnecessary risks,” and, when possible, are “al-
ready being performed on the subject for diagnostic or treatment purposes”
(1991:28,015). The second provision requires researchers to justify any
unavoidable risks by discussing the benefits a study is expected to produce.
According to the Common Rule, risks must be “reasonable in relation to
anticipated benefits, if any, to subjects, and the importance of the knowl-
edge that may reasonably be expected to result” (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, 1991:28,015).
     To apply the beneficence principle in research, investigators and IRBs
must first determine the risks and potential benefits presented by specific
studies. The Belmont Report directs study reviewers to be systematic in
evaluating potential harms and benefits:
    The method of ascertaining risks should be explicit, especially where there
    is no alternative to the use of such vague categories as small or slight risk.
    It should also be determined whether an investigator’s estimates of the
    probability of harm or benefits are reasonable, as judged by known facts
320                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

      or other available studies (National Commission for the Protection of
      Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1979:7).
    The material below describes types of harms and benefits possible in
elder abuse and neglect research.


                    Potential Benefits Offered by Research
     Research benefits are available primarily to two groups. First, people
enrolled in elder abuse and neglect studies might receive personal benefits
due to their study participation. Second, as noted earlier, research is con-
ducted primarily to generate knowledge that could contribute to improved
medical and social interventions for others.
     Benefits to research participants are generally classified as direct or
indirect. Biomedical and behavioral studies may offer a variety of direct
benefits to participants. As the National Commission for the Protection of
Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research noted, “[t]o be
considered ‘direct,’ the possibility of benefit to the subject must be fairly
immediate [and t]he expectation of success should be well-founded scien-
tifically” (1978:13).
     Examples of research offering potential direct benefit are studies de-
signed to enhance current biomedical or behavioral therapies or to create
new training or educational materials (National Commission for the Pro-
tection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research,
1978:13). Direct benefits in research on elder abuse and neglect could be
available in studies comparing different interventions to reduce the occur-
rence of elder abuse and neglect or studies to determine the best methods of
assistance to provide once maltreatment has occurred.
     To be considered direct, potential benefits should be provided by the
intervention(s) under study. In contrast, indirect benefits may be received
independently of the primary study interventions (King, 2000). Such ben-
efits may include added contact with health or social services professionals,
opportunities to engage in social activities outside of one’s usual routine,
and a sense of satisfaction in contributing to a valuable social endeavor.
Indirect benefits can be difficult to predict due to variations in individual
responses. For example, although some older people may value the above
elements of the research experience, others may be distressed by having
their routines disrupted or receiving additional attention from health or
social services professionals. For this reason, although indirect benefits
may “count” as possible benefits to study participants, they ought not be
assigned the same significance as potential direct benefits when studies are
discussed with prospective participants or reviewed by IRBs (Keyserlingk et
al., 1995). The NBAC asserted that indirect benefits should be recognized,
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                                321

but “should not weigh in the judgment of IRBs regarding the balance of
risks and potential benefits to the participants” (2001:74). A similar ap-
proach should be taken regarding benefits studies offer to participants’
relatives or other caregivers.
     It is generally agreed that items such as financial incentives and reim-
bursement for transportation and other costs associated with research par-
ticipation should not be considered benefits to participants. If payments
were allowed to count as benefits, then a high payment could offset serious
and otherwise unacceptable risks to participants (NBAC, 2001:74).
     The evaluation of a study’s potential benefits should also consider its
possible benefits to society. Evaluating possible societal benefits involves
scrutinizing study design, personnel, and other factors affecting the quality
of information collected. Because poorly designed or conducted studies
will not yield valid and reliable data, they fail to offer benefits to others.
Involving people in low-quality studies imposes burdens and risks on them
without an adequate social justification. Thus, investigators must propose,
and IRBs must demand, studies that meet the relevant scientific standards.
When studies are not expected to undergo rigorous peer review as part of
the funding process, investigators and IRBs have a responsibility to obtain
such a review (Office of Protection from Research Risks, 1993:4–11).
     Another dimension of research benefit to others concerns the impor-
tance of the research aim. This dimension of research value has received
relatively little attention in research ethics analysis, but it deserves more
serious consideration. In elder abuse and neglect studies, as in all human
research, there must be a good reason for exposing research participants to
inconveniences, burdens, and possible harms. Investigators should be able
to show why the specific study problem is socially significant and how
information gained from the study will help address the problem (NBAC,
2001:73). For example, studies proposing to test minor variations in exist-
ing health or social service interventions might hold little prospect of mate-
rial benefit to others.5


                           Potential Harms in Research
     As noted above, the Belmont Report lists the following as risks to
research participants: “psychological harm, physical harm, legal harm, so-
cial harm, and economic harm” (National Commission for the Protection
of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1979:7). More
recently, the NBAC elaborated on these concepts. Included as physical



  5An analogy would be clinical trials on so-called “me-too” drugs (Angell, 2000).
322                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

harms are “injury, illness, pain, suffering, or discomfort.” Types of psycho-
logical harm are “negative perceptions of self, emotional suffering (e.g.,
anxiety or shame), or aberrations in thoughts or behavior.” The Commis-
sion defined social harms as “negative effects on one’s interactions or rela-
tionships with others.” Participants experience economic harm when they
incur expenses as a direct or indirect result of research participation. Legal
harms arise when research participation exposes people to actions such as
“arrest, conviction, incarceration, or lawsuits” (NBAC, 2001:71–72).
     These categories of research risk could exist in studies of elder abuse
and neglect. Older participants in such studies could suffer physical harm
from family or professional caregivers due to the participant’s negative
statements about these individuals. Older participants could also experi-
ence anxiety or other emotional distress at being asked about a difficult
living situation. Relationships with relatives could be damaged as a result
of information provided to researchers. Older participants could incur
financial costs if the research triggers removal of an unpaid family caregiver
or another change in living situation. Information disclosures to research-
ers could also lead to guardianship or other legal actions, which could be
perceived as detrimental by older participants.
     Family and professional caregivers participating in elder abuse and
neglect studies could face an array of research harms as well. Although
they would be unlikely to experience physical harm as a result of research,
shame and other psychological harm from being asked to discuss poten-
tially problematic behavior could be a common risk in such studies. In
addition, family relationships could suffer if research triggers questions
about a caregiver’s conduct or abilities. Family caregivers could be de-
prived of financial benefits if research leads to removal of relatives from an
older person’s home. Professional caregivers could experience economic
harm if their research participation leads to employment termination. Per-
sons reported for abuse and neglect based on information elicited in re-
search could also be subjected to legal harm.
     Of course, older persons and their caregivers face risks of this sort in
their customary interactions with health care and social services personnel.
In evaluating potential research harms, the emphasis should be on any
additional risks that will arise due to the data gathering associated with a
research project. If research participation will entail interviews, examina-
tions, or other interventions that participants would not encounter in their
usual contacts with health care and social services personnel, the risks
accompanying these interventions are properly classified as research risks
that should be minimized, justified, and, in many cases, disclosed to poten-
tial participants.
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                    323

                       Minimizing Risk in Research
     Minimizing physical and other research-related risks to participants in
elder abuse and neglect studies can raise complex issues. The Common
Rule directs researchers to minimize risks “by using procedures already
being performed on the subjects for diagnostic or treatment purposes” (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 1991:28,015). Investigators
may also reduce risks by ensuring that (1) the research team is properly
qualified and trained, (2) a system is in place to address harm arising in the
research process, (3) confidentiality measures are appropriate, (4) partici-
pants are adequately monitored during the study, and (5) individuals are
excluded or withdrawn from studies presenting unacceptable risk (NBAC,
2001:73).
     Two general features of elder abuse and neglect research pose risks to
participants. First, investigators often seek information that could produce
harmful consequences if it were released to protective services or other
authorities. A variety of methods allow investigators to obtain needed data
while minimizing this risk. Sometimes data can be obtained from public
records or other public sources. Sometimes data can be collected through
the use of interviews or other procedures conducted in routine health care
and social services activities; in such cases, data collection will not expose
individuals to reporting risks beyond those they would encounter in clinical
and social services settings. Sometimes data can be recorded without iden-
tifying participants. Sometimes identifying information can be destroyed
shortly after it is collected. Strict security measures can also be adopted,
including identifying participants by code and severely restricting access to
documents linking codes with individual participants (Office of Protection
from Research Risks, 1993:3–33). The Common Rule permits IRBs to
waive the usual requirement for a signed consent form if such forms would
be the sole record tying an individual participant to research and a breach
of confidentiality constitutes the principal study risk (U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, 1991:28,017).
     When investigators studying elder abuse and neglect seek information
about a participant’s mental health, illegal conduct, drug or alcohol use, or
other conduct with potential negative financial or employment conse-
quences, they may obtain special confidentiality protections from federal
officials. Federal law authorizes the Secretary of the Department of Health
and Human Services to issue certificates of confidentiality to protect par-
ticipants’ privacy in both government and privately funded projects (Public
Health Service Act §310(d), U.S. Code 42 §241(d), 1994). The certificates
allow investigators to withhold “from all persons not connected with the
conduct of such research the names or other identifying characteristics of
such individuals.” Investigators with certificates “may not be compelled in
324                                                      ELDER MISTREATMENT

any federal, state or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other
proceedings to identify” research participants (Public Health Service Act,
1994). Certificates are granted only when officials deem them necessary to
achieve the project aims.
     Certificates of confidentiality may prevent researchers from being forced
by government authorities to disclose private information about partici-
pants suspected to be victims or perpetrators of elder abuse and neglect.
Yet some investigators and commentators question whether certificates
legally exempt researchers from reporting requirements, and no definitive
court ruling exists to resolve this question (Amaya-Jackson et al., 2000).
Some federal agencies reportedly refuse funding for studies in which inves-
tigators with confidentiality certificates plan to refrain from reporting child
abuse and neglect (Runyan, 2000). Moreover, confidentiality certificates
do not prohibit investigators from voluntarily disclosing information about
suspected abuse and neglect. Thus, researchers must address the ethical
issues that arise when withholding information could leave older persons in
serious jeopardy.
     This point is related to the second risk-producing feature of elder abuse
and neglect research. Older persons who participate and those whose
relatives or professional caregivers participate may face physical and other
serious risks. To minimize such risks to older persons, researchers should
take measures to address suspected abuse and neglect. But such measures
may cause harm to relatives or professional caregivers. Moreover, such
measures may be opposed by older participants who prefer their risky
situations to the available alternatives. Finally, social services interventions
may do more harm than good for an older individual.
     As this discussion reveals, the ethical and policy directive to minimize
risks can present difficult trade-offs in elder abuse and neglect research.
Measures to minimize harm to older participants, such as reporting sus-
pected abuse and neglect to authorities and the protective interventions that
follow, can increase psychological, social, financial, and legal risks to rela-
tives and caregivers. Similarly, measures to safeguard private information
about families and caregivers can leave older persons vulnerable to harm.
And measures to minimize certain kinds of harm to older persons may
increase their exposure to other kinds of harm. The conflicts that may arise
in attempts to protect older persons and caregivers from research harms are
addressed in further detail in the section on confronting major ethical con-
flicts.


            Balancing Potential Harms and Benefits in Research
    After investigators have reduced study risks as much as possible, some
risks will almost always remain. The IRB must then determine that these
remaining risks are justified by the benefits the study is expected to yield.
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                    325

     As noted above, the Common Rule requires that a study’s risks are
“reasonable in relation to anticipated benefits.” “Reasonable” is a term
subject to varied interpretation. In directing IRBs to decide whether a
proposed study presents a reasonable balance of risks and anticipated ben-
efits, federal officials delegated to IRB members the authority to interpret
what risks are reasonable. The Common Rule requires that IRBs include as
members nonscientists and persons not affiliated with the research institu-
tion (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1991:28,015). By
requiring such members, officials sought to ensure that reasonableness will
be evaluated not just by researchers and their colleagues, but by persons
who might have a different perspective on research harms and benefits.
Reform proposals to increase the number of nonscientist and unaffiliated
members are intended to increase the chance that a diversity of perspectives
will be represented when research harms and benefits are balanced (NBAC,
2001:63).
     Besides requiring IRBs to decide whether research risks are reasonable,
the Common Rule and the federal regulations addressing research involving
vulnerable populations direct IRBs to determine when research risks are
minimal. According to the Common Rule, study interventions present
minimal risk if “the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort
anticipated in the research are not greater in and of themselves than those
ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine
physical or psychological examinations or tests” (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, 1991:28,013–28,014).
     As observed in the section on respect for persons in research, the Com-
mon Rule permits investigators to withhold certain information from pro-
spective participants, or to forgo consent altogether, only if research inter-
ventions present no more than minimal risk. In addition, the NBAC
proposed that research interventions presenting greater than minimal risk
and no prospect of direct benefit should be allowed only with an incapable
individual’s prior competent consent or after review and approval by a
special standing panel of diverse experts and community representatives
convened by the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices (NBAC, 1998:54, 61).
     The above approaches require IRBs and other reviewers to apply the
Common Rule’s minimal risk definition. Not everyone is satisfied with the
regulatory definition, however. Some argue that its reference to the risks of
everyday life is problematic. These critics say that IRB members are
unlikely to know enough about the nature, probability, and degree of ev-
eryday risks to make comparisons with research risks (Kopelman, 1995).
Furthermore, empirical studies have shown variations in the research inter-
ventions clinicians and others classify as minimal risk (Dresser, 1999:22).
     Another problem is that the Common Rule’s definition of minimal risk
fails to clarify whether research risks should be compared to everyday risks
326                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

faced by people in the general population or by subjects individually. Fed-
eral regulations issued in 1981 were accompanied by a preamble stating
that “the risks of harm ordinarily encountered in daily life means those
risks encountered in the daily lives of the subjects of the research” (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 1981:8373). But this interpre-
tation is contested by the NBAC (2001:83) and other advisory groups
(National Human Research Protections Advisory Committee, 2001), which
take the position that minimal risk should be tied to daily risks faced by
members of the general population. If everyday risks were individualized,
higher research risks could be labeled minimal risk for participants facing
higher-than-average daily risks due to illness or poor living situations. As a
result, less ethical scrutiny could be devoted to studies involving people
already at relative disadvantage. For example, a waiver of informed con-
sent might be obtained in a study presenting higher risk because it involved
participants living in high-crime areas. And as the NBAC noted, the indi-
vidualized standard for minimal risk “would impose disproportionate bur-
dens of research on the ill and provide weaker protections for them than for
healthy individuals” (2001:83). Such an approach would thus disregard
the ethical principle of justice, discussed below.
     In applying the Common Rule’s minimal risk and consent waiver pro-
visions, the focus should be on whether research participation exposes
older persons and caregivers to risks greater than those present in ordinary
life and routine medical and social services encounters. For example, con-
sider an interview study of family members caring for older individuals. If
the study would expose participants to more detailed scrutiny than they
would encounter in their usual interactions with the health care and social
services systems, and if investigators planned to report suspected maltreat-
ment to protective services authorities, the study would present more than
minimal risk to study participants. The higher risk would exist because
study participation would expose family members to reporting risks greater
than those present in routine clinical and social services activities. If, how-
ever, data would be collected in interviews conducted as part of the ordi-
nary activities of a social services agency, and the agency’s ordinary report-
ing practices would be followed, the research risks would appear not to
exceed the minimal risk threshold. In the first situation, the Common Rule
would appear to rule out a consent waiver; in the second, the minimal risk
requirement for a waiver would be satisfied.
     An appropriate balance of risks and expected benefits is central to the
ethical conduct of research on elder abuse and neglect. Specific challenges
in determining what constitutes such a balance are discussed below in the
section on confronting major ethical conflicts.
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                    327

    JUSTICE IN RESEARCH ON ELDER ABUSE AND NEGLECT
     The Belmont Report’s final ethical principle is justice. Justice in re-
search involves the fair distribution of risks and benefits associated with
research. The principle advises against relying too heavily on disadvan-
taged individuals or groups to bear the burdens of acting as research par-
ticipants. On the other hand, the justice principle holds that individuals
and groups should receive a fair share of the benefits available through
study participation and the improved health and social interventions re-
search makes possible.
     The justice principle has several applications to research on elder abuse
and neglect. One is that investigators observing the principle will not seek
study participants solely from economically and socially disadvantaged
populations simply because of “their easy availability, their compromised
positions, or their manipulability” (National Commission for the Protec-
tion of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1979:5).
Similarly, vulnerable populations such as decisionally incapable adults
should not be involved in research if adequate data can be obtained by
studying adults able to make their own choices about participation. In-
stead, there must be sound scientific and policy justifications for targeting
disadvantaged or vulnerable populations in research.
     Three additional applications of the justice principle pertain to the
distribution of benefits available through research on elder abuse and ne-
glect. One such application is to give individuals and groups fair access to
studies that offer potential direct benefit to participants. Thus, investiga-
tors ought not exclude certain people from studies simply because it is more
inconvenient or costly to recruit them (Institute of Medicine, 1994:82).
     Another application of the justice principle involves ensuring that the
improved interventions publicly funded research makes possible are reason-
ably available to research participants and to those in the general popula-
tion who would benefit from them (National Commission for the Protec-
tion of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1979:5).
Thus, when elder abuse and neglect studies yield health and social benefits,
those benefits should be available to groups that participated in the studies
and to others based on need rather than ability to pay.
     Finally, the failure to implement a robust research program to study
elder abuse and neglect can be seen as unjust, because it denies vulnerable
older persons and their families the benefits that could flow from such a
program. A fair system of research funding will allocate funds to studies of
serious public health needs, including elder abuse and neglect (Dresser,
2001b).
328                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

      CONFRONTING THE MAJOR ETHICAL CONFLICTS IN
         RESEARCH ON ELDER ABUSE AND NEGLECT
     The societal importance of advancing knowledge and developing im-
proved health and social programs addressing elder abuse and neglect is
undeniable. At the same time, other important interests must be respected
in the research process. Research ethics and policy recognize the interests
of individuals (or their authorized representatives) in being informed about
the studies they are asked to join. Research ethics and policy also deem
important the protection of research participants from unnecessary and
unreasonable risks. These ethical and policy considerations support certain
restrictions on the conduct of research. Such restrictions reflect the judg-
ment that advances in knowledge fail to justify compromising significant
interests of the individual.
     In research on elder abuse and neglect, the most serious ethical conflicts
involve societal interests in gaining knowledge about elder abuse and ne-
glect, participants’ interests in being informed of research risks, and the
interests of both participants and nonparticipants in being protected from
harm. Below, I discuss the major conflicts that can arise and offer guidance
on how to resolve them.


      Conflicts Regarding Responses to Suspected Abuse and Neglect
     The first set of conflicts concerns researchers’ responses to suspected
elder abuse and neglect. Here, a variety of interests may be at odds.
Societal interests in advancing knowledge might be best served if research-
ers take no action in response to suspected harmful conduct. Relatives,
professional caregivers, and older persons who prefer their current living
situations might be more likely to enroll and supply accurate information if
the information will be used purely for research purposes.
     Though this approach promotes societal interests in generating high-
quality research data, it gives little regard to older persons’ interests in
protection from harm. From a broader perspective, the approach over-
looks the societal interest in preventing elder abuse and neglect, an interest
explicitly recognized in laws requiring reporting of suspected maltreatment.
     A researcher’s complete failure to respond to suspected abuse and ne-
glect is questionable on both legal and ethical grounds. Although state
reporting laws vary, some have language that could apply to researchers
(Garfield, 1991). As noted above, a federal certificate of confidentiality
does not necessarily exempt researchers from state reporting requirements.
Apart from statutory reporting mandates, some writers suggest that courts
could hold investigators legally responsible for acting to minimize harm
they discover in the course of research. The basis of this duty would be the
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                                      329

decision in Tarasoff v Board of Regents of the University of California (529
P2d 334, 1976) and subsequent court decisions holding that professionals
have duties to take reasonable measures to protect potential victims of their
patients’ or clients’ violence. Paul Appelbaum and Alan Rosenbaum note
that courts might deem certificates of confidentiality irrelevant to the inves-
tigators’ duty to take some action on behalf of potential victims (1989).
     Besides their possible legal obligations, researchers may have ethical
responsibilities to respond to suspected neglect and abuse. Appelbaum and
Rosenbaum suggest that “[o]n ethical grounds alone, . . . it may be reason-
able for investigators to consider building provisions for the protection of
potential victims into their protocols” (1989:889). Investigators in a con-
sortium of longitudinal studies of child abuse and neglect known as
LONGSCAN, as well as those conducting the MacArthur Risk Assessment
Study of community violence in former mental patients, recognized an
ethical responsibility to prevent harm to both study participants and third
parties, although their exact responses varied due to the specific study
circumstances and different philosophies of study teams and their reviewing
IRBs (Knight et al., 2000; Monahan et al., 1993).6
     The ethical and legal duties to report suspected abuse and neglect are
strongest when researchers conclude that an older person is at risk of
serious, imminent harm. If an older person appears to be in imminent
danger, a report to protective services workers may be justified even if the
older person refuses assistance (Garfield, 1991:870). Similarly, when inves-
tigators believe a decisionally impaired older adult is at risk of grave and
immediate harm, they may have both legal and ethical responsibilities to
report, despite a caregiver’s refusal of assistance. As the probability, mag-
nitude, and imminence of harm decrease, however, so does the justification




  6Celia Fisher proposed that the views of the population of prospective research partici-
pants should be considered in formulating investigator responses to potential risky situations.
In a study of high school students, Fisher and her colleagues elicited participants’ opinions
about what investigators should do if adolescents promised confidentiality in a study indi-
cated they were in danger or engaged in high-risk conduct. Students were asked whether
investigators should keep the information confidential, “talk to you first and let you get
help,” or notify a “parent or other concerned adult.” According to Fisher and her colleagues,
their most important finding was “that urban youth do not view the maintenance of confi-
dentiality favorably in situations in which an investigator learns that a research participant is
a victim of or engaged in behaviors adolescents perceive to be serious problems.” Fisher and
her colleagues also believe their findings suggest adolescent research participants promised
confidentiality still expect assistance if they disclose abuse or involvement in high-risk con-
duct, including conduct presenting a serious risk to others (Fisher et al., 1996). Similar
studies of older persons would indicate whether or not they hold beliefs resembling those of
the adolescents Fisher’s team studied.
330                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

for reporting. In the absence of a clear and serious threat, investigators may
adopt alternative responses to the living situations of older persons and
their caregivers.
     One option is to furnish research participants with information on
available community resources for individuals and families with various
living difficulties. Investigators can also express any concerns they may
have about a participant’s living situation and urge the at-risk individual to
obtain help. In planning their studies, investigators can identify an appro-
priate services agency and establish a referral process for participants ex-
pressing a wish for assistance (Appelbaum and Rosenbaum, 1989:892).
     Investigators in the LONGSCAN studies adopted a variety of responses
to participants in research on child abuse and neglect. In these studies,
research team members are most likely to learn of possible maltreatment
through interviews with 12-year-olds. Before their study participation,
parents and children are told that children will be asked about abuse,
neglect, or exposure to violence and that investigators will report children
deemed to be at risk of serious harm. Children participate in a computer-
administered interview that includes questions about various forms of abuse.
A human interviewer is present but is unable to see the child’s answers. The
children are told that they may skip questions and stop the session at any
time.
     The LONGSCAN interviewers are trained to recognize and comfort
children in distress, and interviewers may terminate the session when a
child exhibits persistent distress. Interviews end with “a debriefing with
each child that acknowledges that some of the questions may have been
difficult, and all study participants are provided with a list of local family
services agencies and how and why to contact these resources” (Knight et
al., 2000:769). In two LONGSCAN studies, interviewers consult clinical
staff if children appear distressed. In another study, interviews are con-
ducted in schools and distressed children are asked to identify a counselor
or teacher with whom they can discuss their problems.
     Each LONGSCAN study has identified interview responses that could
indicate abuse or neglect. Two LONGSCAN study teams report cases in
which children give responses deemed to indicate they are at significant
risk. Most interesting and controversial is the approach of two other
LONGSCAN studies to a child’s indications of possible maltreatment.
When a child responds in this way, the computer asks whether the child
wishes to discuss possible abuse with the interviewer or another person. If
the child answers no, the interview ends without further inquiry into the
threat. The interviewer is unaware of the child’s responses, and the data are
recorded in a manner that prevents other researchers from identifying the
child (Kotch, 2000). Thus, the research team never obtains the information
necessary to evaluate whether the situation should be reported. If the child
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                   331

answers yes, the interviewer or an adult the child designates asks follow-up
questions to determine whether reportable abuse has occurred. If it has, the
child is told how and why a report will be made. If the problem does not
appear to be reportable abuse, the child meets with an appropriate adult to
discuss personal problems and receives information on local resources and
how to obtain future assistance (Kotch, 2000).
     In commenting on this approach, ethicist N. King described its benefits
and risks to children and their families. The approach protects children and
families from the harm that could come from a more liberal reporting
approach, including unjustified disruptions in home life and an inadequate
or damaging social services intervention. At the same time, the two
LONGSCAN studies’ reporting model “privileges research over interven-
tion,” on the assumption that better data will produce better interventions
in the future. Yet researchers may be biased in making this determination,
she noted. Furthermore, King questioned whether 12-year-olds should be
put in the position of deciding whether to discuss their situations with
researchers. She asked, “is this a means for adolescents to adopt or respect
the values and priorities within their families, or is it a way for LONGSCAN
researchers to pass the buck to their adolescent subjects?” (1999:184).
     The above LONGSCAN approach could be adapted to elder abuse and
neglect studies involving older adults with full or mildly compromised deci-
sional abilities. Investigators could devise measures that enabled them to
avoid learning about indications of possible abuse or neglect when study
participants refused to discuss these matters. Investigators proposing such
a strategy could face opposition from IRBs and others evaluating the ethics
of the research, however.
     Related issues are presented when elder abuse and neglect research
involves surveys or other methods in which participants remain anonymous
or research team members are blinded to participants’ responses. These
approaches may be attractive because they allow investigators to guarantee
confidentiality and avoid the need to devise measures to address suspected
abuse and neglect. At the same time, such approaches have been challenged
on ethical grounds. For example, the NBAC criticized the Common Rule’s
failure to cover anonymous surveys that ask sensitive questions (2001:37).
Similarly, ethicists N. King and Larry Churchill raised the following ques-
tions about the use of investigator blinding in interview studies of child
abuse and neglect: “Might such a research design increase the risk of wrongs
or harms to the child subjects who expect to develop some relationship with
the researcher who asks such intimate questions? Will anonymity obviate
researchers’ feelings of relationship with and obligations toward child sub-
jects or just leave them with information on which they are powerless to
act?” (2000:722).
     The beneficence principle would support offering assistance to partici-
332                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

pants in research incorporating participant anonymity or investigator blind-
ing. At minimum, investigators could supply to all prospective participants
information on available health and social services for families and older
persons. Research findings on the risk and prevalence of elder abuse and
neglect in particular areas could also be shared with local protective ser-
vices agencies and government officials, with the aim of increasing aware-
ness of and services for at-risk individuals. Moreover, researchers should
consider whether ethical principles would in some cases support alterna-
tives to anonymity and blinding, alternatives such as “a thorough, thought-
ful, nondeceptive, informed consent process in an ongoing research rela-
tionship, and a commitment to honor confidentiality unless grave harm
appears imminent.” (King and Churchill, 2000:722).


                Conflicts Regarding Information Disclosure
     The second major conflict pits the interests of participants in being
informed of research risks against societal interests in advancing knowl-
edge. Sometimes withholding information from prospective participants
would allow investigators to collect the most accurate data. Two such
situations may arise. One occurs when investigators studying relatives or
professional caregivers plan to report or take other actions if a research
team member comes to suspect elder abuse or neglect. In this case, the
concern is that prospective participants aware of the investigators’ plans
will either refuse to enroll or if they do enroll, will provide inaccurate
information. The other situation occurs when investigators are studying
older persons. Here, the fear is that if investigators tell prospective partici-
pants (or their representatives) about plans to address suspected abuse or
neglect, individuals opposed to protective interventions will refuse to enroll
or, if they do enroll, will provide inaccurate information.
     As indicated above, disclosure in both situations will often be required.
The Common Rule permits exceptions to disclosure only when research
presents no more than minimal risk to participants and when disclosure
would make research impracticable. Underlying the narrowness of the
exception is the ethical judgment that potential knowledge gains fail to
justify depriving individuals of the freedom to refuse participation in re-
search that exposes them to risks greater than those encountered in every-
day life and routine health and social services practice (Beauchamp, 1996).
Although failure to disclose reporting plans may be justified in clinical and
social services programs designed to assist specific older persons, current
policy deems such concealment unacceptable when data are collected for
the purpose of advancing knowledge.
     Current policy also recognizes that an investigator’s failure to disclose
plans for addressing suspicions of neglect and abuse could have negative
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                      333

long-term consequences for research, as well as the health care and social
services systems. This is because research participants and community
members who learn of the failure to disclose could lose trust in researchers,
clinicians, and social workers (Bok, 1992).
     At the same time, it should be recognized that the current policy re-
quirements for disclosure could have negative consequences. The price of
disclosure is a possible loss of societal benefits. This loss could occur if the
disclosure requirements limit researchers’ abilities to assess and understand
the problem of elder abuse and neglect. Whether this occurs will depend in
part on whether researchers are able to devise methods that avoid or com-
pensate for possible underreporting and other problems related to the dis-
closure requirements.
     The research ethics literature fails to address information disclosure in
the specific context of research on elder abuse and neglect. This topic has
been covered, however, in articles examining research on other forms of
harmful behavior. Discussions of the ethics of research on child abuse and
neglect generally support disclosure of investigators’ plans to address sus-
pected misconduct. For example, psychologist Celia Fisher argues for dis-
closure of all risks that could affect a child’s and parent’s willingness to
enroll, including the possibility that suspected abuse will be reported (Fisher,
1999).
     In the LONGSCAN studies of child abuse and neglect, investigators
and reviewing IRBs favored disclosure as well. In these studies, parents, as
well as children aged eight and older, are told that investigators will take
various measures in response to suspected maltreatment, including report-
ing potentially serious harm to authorities. Parents also are given the
option to review the questions their children will be asked. This represents
a decision to give children and parents control over the information they
provide, even though this may bias study results (Runyan, 1999). Study
teams and IRBs in different LONGSCAN projects adopted different lan-
guage to disclose reporting plans, however, with some disclosures more
explicit than others. The language differences reflected differences in study
responses to suspected abuse and neglect, which were discussed above.
     A similar approach was adopted in the MacArthur Risk Assessment
study of risk factors for community violence in former mental patients. In
study consent forms, prospective participants were told that confidentiality
would be preserved unless researchers believed the lives of participants or
third parties were in danger or child abuse was discovered (Monahan et al.,
1993). Thus, individuals had the option to refuse participation or to modify
their response to investigators based on their awareness that reporting was
possible.
     In sum, if research participation will expose older persons or caregivers
to risks greater than those present in ordinary encounters with health and
334                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

social services personnel, both research policy and ethics support disclosure
of such risks. Balancing the goals of advancing knowledge, respecting
informed decision making, and protecting research participants from harm
will never be easy. The investigator’s overriding ethical obligation is to
detect and evaluate potential conflicts in the initial phase of study planning.
The appropriate ways to address conflicts will vary depending on the spe-
cific characteristics of the study. Often, there will be more than one ethi-
cally defensible option. What is most important is to develop approaches
that are supported by a reasonable ethical analysis.


         CONCLUSION: EXPANDING THE DELIBERATIONS
     The Belmont Report principles and Common Rule requirements supply
guidance on the appropriate conduct of research on elder abuse and ne-
glect. Yet these principles and regulations are by necessity somewhat gen-
eral. Every human research proposal presents its own issues; thus, careful
deliberation by research teams, IRBs, and funding agency officials will
always be essential.
     These deliberations could be enriched by the views of people familiar
with the actual situations of older persons, their families, and their
caregivers. Since the Belmont Report and Common Rule were written,
community consultation and representation have emerged as methods for
making research more ethical. Indeed, the NBAC specifically advised that
representatives of prospective research participants, including those from
vulnerable populations, “should be encouraged to participate in the study
design and oversight processes” (2001:91). By seeking information from
members of the population of prospective research participants, investiga-
tors may learn of better ways to balance competing interests in their studies.
As Celia Fisher and her colleagues have shown, people affected by research
may have unexpected beliefs and attitudes about researchers’ responsibili-
ties to participants.
     Elder abuse and neglect research seems especially suited to this ap-
proach. Several writers have endorsed the involvement of a panel of resi-
dents and others who will be affected by research to review proposals to
conduct research in nursing homes (Sachs et al., 1993). This concept could
be extended to support other forms of community involvement in research
on elder abuse and neglect. Members of the relevant communities could
help investigators determine the facts that should be disclosed to prospec-
tive research participants and create effective methods for conveying the
information. They could help researchers discern the appropriate balance
between protecting participants’ privacy and preventing harm to vulnerable
older persons. They could join researchers and social services workers in
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                                    335

developing appropriate responses to suspected abuse and neglect discov-
ered in the course of a study.
     Awareness of the basic ethical and policy considerations, combined
with insights from the community of research participants, will supply the
most solid moral foundation for research on elder abuse and neglect. A
research program built on this foundation is most likely to receive contin-
ued public support, as well. The need for increased knowledge about this
serious social problem is great, but so is the need to respect and protect the
individuals, families, and communities affected by research.


                                     REFERENCES
Advisory Work Group on Human Subject Research Involving the Protected Classes
    1998     Recommendations on the Oversight of Human Subject Research Involving the
             Protected Classes. New York: New York State Department of Health.
Amaya-Jackson, L., R.R.S. Socolar, W.M.Hunter, and D.K. Runyan
    2000     Directly questioning children and adolescents about maltreatment. Journal of
             Interpersonal Violence 15:725–759.
Amdur, R., M. Speers, and E. Bankert
    2000     IRB triage of projects that involve medical record review. IRB: A Review of
             Human Subjects Research 22(January-February 2000):4–7.
Angell, M.
    2000     Is academic medicine for sale? New England Journal of Medicine 342:1516-
             1518.
Appelbaum, P., and T. Grisso
    1998     Assessing patients’ capacities to consent to treatment. New England Journal of
             Medicine 319:1635–1638.
Appelbaum, P.S., and A. Rosenbaum
    1989     Tarasoff and the researcher: Does the duty to protect apply in the research
             setting? American Psychologist 44(6):885–894
Beauchamp, T.
    1996     Moral foundations. In Ethics and Epidemiology, S. Coughlin and T. Beauchamp,
             eds. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bellin, E., and N. Dubler
    2001     The quality improvement-research divide and the need for external oversight.
             American Journal of Public Health 91:1512–1517.
Berg, J.W.
    1996     Legal and ethical complexities of consent with cognitively impaired research sub-
             jects: Proposed guidelines. Journal of Law, Medicine and Ethics 24:18–35.
Bok, S.
    1992     Informed consent in tests of patient reliability. Journal of the American Medical
             Association 267:1118–1119.
Bonnie, R.
    1997     Research with cognitively impaired subjects. Archives of General Psychiatry
             54:105–111.
Cassarett, D., J. Karlawish, and J. Sugarman
    2000     Determining when quality improvement initiatives should be considered research.
             Journal of the American Medical Association 283:2275–2280.
336                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
    1999     Guidelines for Defining Public Health Research and Public Health Non-Research.
             Available: http://www.cdc.gov/od/ads/opspoll1.htm [Accessed November 28,
             2001].
Dresser, R.
    1996     Mentally disabled research subjects: The enduring policy issues. Journal of the
             American Medical Association 276:67–72.
    1999     Research involving persons with mental disabilities: A review of policy issues and
             proposals. In Research Involving Persons with Mental Disorders That May Af-
             fect Decisionmaking Capacity, vol. 2. Bethesda, MD: National Bioethics Advi-
             sory Commission.
    2001a Dementia research: Ethics and policy for the twenty-first century. Georgia Law
             Review 35:661–690.
    2001b When Science Offers Salvation: Patient Advocacy and Research Ethics. New
             York: Oxford University Press.
Fisher, C.
    1999     Relational ethics and research with vulnerable populations. In Research Involv-
             ing Persons with Mental Disorders That May Affect Decisionmaking Capacity,
             vol. 2. Bethesda, MD: National Bioethics Advisory Commission.
Fisher, C., A. Higgins-D’Alessandro, J.B. Rau, T.L. Kuther, and S. Belanger
    1996     Referring and reporting research participants at risk: Views from urban adoles-
             cents. Child Development 67:2086–2100.
Garfield, A.
    1991     Elder abuse and the states’ adult protective services response: Time for a change
             in California. Hastings Law Journal 42:861–937.
Glantz, L,
    1992     The influence of the Nuremberg Code on U.S. statutes and regulations. In The
             Nazi Doctors and the Nuremberg Code, G. Annas and M. Grodin, eds. New
             York: Oxford University Press.
Hastings Center
    1987     Guidelines in the Termination of Life-Sustaining Treatment in the Care of the
             Dying. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
High, D., P.J. Whitehouse, S.G. Post, and L. Berg
    1994     Guidelines for addressing ethical and legal issues in Alzheimer disease research:
             A position paper. Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders 4:66–74.
Hoffman, D., and J. Schwartz
    1998     Proxy consent to participation of the decisionally impaired in medical research—
             Maryland’s Policy Initiative. Journal of Health Care Law & Policy 1:123–153.
Institute of Medicine
    1994     Women and Health Research: Ethical and Legal Issues of Including Women in
             Clinical Studies, vol. 1. A. Mastroianni, R. Faden, and D. Federman, eds. Wash-
             ington, DC: National Academy Press.
Kass, N., and J. Sugarman
    1996     Are research subjects adequately protected? A review and discussion of studies
             conducted by the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments.
             Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal 6:271–282.
Keyserlingk, E.W., K. Glass, S. Kogant, and S. Gauthier
    1995     Proposed guidelines for the participation of persons with dementia as research
             subjects. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 38:319–362.
ETHICAL AND POLICY ISSUES IN RESEARCH                                                     337

King, N.
   1995       Privacy and confidentiality in research. In Encyclopedia of Bioethics, W. Reich,
              ed. New York: MacMillan.
    1999      Research in distressed families. In Beyond Regulations, N. King, G. Henderson,
              and J. Stein, eds. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
    2000      Defining and describing benefit appropriately in clinical trials. Journal of Law,
              Medicine & Ethics 28:332–343.
King, N., and L. Churchill
    2000      Ethical principles guiding research on child and adolescent subjects. Journal of
              Interpersonal Violence 15:710–724.
Knight, E., D. Runyan, H. Dubowitz, C. Brandford, J. Kotch, A. Litrownik, and W. Hunter
    2000      Methodological and ethical challenges associated with child self-report of mal-
              treatment. Journal of Interpersonal Violence 15:760–775.
Kopelman, L.
    1995      Research Policy: Risk and Vulnerable Groups. In Encyclopedia of Bioethics, W.
              Reich, ed. New York: MacMillan.
Kotch, J.
    2000      Ethical issues in longitudinal child maltreatment research. Journal of Interper-
              sonal Violence 15:696–709.
Monahan, J., P.S. Appelbaum, E. Mulvey, P.C. Robbins, and C. Lidz
    1993      Ethical and legal duties in conducting research on violence: Lessons from the
              MacArthur Risk Assessment Study. Violence and Victims 8:387–396.
National Bioethics Advisory Commission (NBAC)
    1998      Research Involving Persons with Mental Disorders That May Impair
              Decisionmaking Capacity, vol. 1. Bethesda, MD: National Bioethics Advisory
              Commission.
    2001      Ethical and Policy Issues in Research Involving Human Participants: Report and
              Recommendations, Bethesda, MD: National Bioethics Advisory Commission.
National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral
Research
    1975      Research Involving Children: Report and Recommendations, DHEW Publication
              No. (OS) 76-127. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
    1978       Research Involving Those Institutionalized as Mentally Infirm: Report and Rec-
              ommendations. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
    1979       The Belmont Report: Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the Protection of
              Human Subjects of Research. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Of-
              fice.
National Human Research Protections Advisory Committee
    2001      Children’s Workgroup Report Draft. Available: http://ohrp.osophs.dhhs.gov [Ac-
              cessed December 5, 2001].
Office of Protection from Research Risks
    1993      Protecting Human Research Subjects: Institutional Review Board Guidebook.
              Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
O’Sullivan, C., and C. Fisher
    1997      The effect of confidentiality and reporting procedures on parent-child agreement
              to participate in adolescent risk research. Applied Developmental Science 1:185–
              197.
Pritchard, I.
    2000      Searching for research involving human subjects. IRB: A Review of Human
              Subjects Research 22(January-February):4–7.
338                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

Ratzan, R.
   1985      Technical aspects of obtaining informed consent from persons with senile demen-
             tia of the Alzheimer type. In Alzheimer’s Dementia: Dilemmas in Clinical Re-
             search, V. Melnick and N. Dubler, eds. Clifton, NJ: Humana Press.
Runyan, D.
   1999      Maltreatment in families: A research dilemma. In Beyond Regulations, N. King,
             G. Henderson, and J. Stein, eds. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
             Press.
   2000      The ethical, legal, and methodological implications of directly asking children
             about abuse. Journal of Interpersonal Violence 15:675–681.
Sachs, G., and C. Cassel
   1990      Biomedical research involving older human subjects. Law, Medicine & Health
             Care 18:234–243.
Sachs, G., J. Rhymes, and C. Cassel
   1993      Biomedical and behavioral research in nursing homes: Guidelines for ethical
             investigations. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 41:771–777.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
   1981      Final Regulations Amending Basic HHS Policy for the Protection of Human Sub-
             jects. Federal Register 46:8366–8391.
   1991      Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects (Common Rule). Federal
             Register 56:28,012–28,018.
   1999      Additional Protections for Children Involved as Subjects in Research, Code of
             Federal Regulations 45:§ 46.408(c).
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
   1999      Protection of Human Subjects. Code of Federal Regulations 21: Parts 50 and 56.
Wendler, D., and K. Prasad
   2001      Core safeguards for clinical research with adults who are unable to consent.
             Annals of Internal Medicine 135:514–523.
World Medical Association
   2000      Declaration of Helsinki: Ethical principles for medical research involving human
             subjects. Journal of the American Medical Association 284:3043–3045.
                                             12

   The Clinical and Medical Forensics of
         Elder Abuse and Neglect
        Carmel Bitondo Dyer, Marie-Therese Connolly,
                   and Patricia McFeeley*




                            T
                           he medical forensic aspects of elder abuse and
neglect are largely unexplored and undocumented. Those who work in the
field of elder abuse and neglect believe that the state of medical knowledge
and forensic science regarding elder abuse and neglect is approximately
equivalent to that of child abuse and neglect three decades ago and domes-
tic violence 10 to 15 years ago (Elder Justice Roundtable Report, 2000).
Within the relevant victimized populations there are similarities and differ-
ences among the factors contributing to their vulnerability and victimiza-
tion. Similarities include feared retaliation, perceived stigmatization at
having been victimized, desire not to leave home, desire to protect the




  *Carmel Bitondo Dyer, M.D., is an assistant professor of medicine at Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, and the Director of the Harris County Hospital District Geriatrics
Program; Marie-Therese Connolly, J.D., is a senior trial counsel in the Civil Division, Depart-
ment of Justice; Patricia McFeeley, M.D., is an associate professor in the Office of the Medi-
cal Investigator at the University of New Mexico.
  The views expressed in Marie-Therese Connolly’s contributions to this paper are her own
and do not necessarily reflect those of the Department of Justice.
  The authors would like to acknowledge Samuel Riley and Rosa Torres for their technical
assistance, and Jill Callahan for her editorial assistance. They are also grateful for review of
the manuscript by Drs. Kenneth L. Minaker and Constantine G. Lyketsos and members of the
National Academy of Sciences Panel on Risk and Prevalence of Elder Abuse and Neglect.


                                             339
340                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

wrongdoer, other emotional harm, and as in some cases involving persons
with diminished capacity, difficulties in communicating what transpired.
     Perhaps the starkest difference is that whereas children and younger
victims of domestic violence are generally healthy and not expected to die,
older people often have numerous underlying medical problems, and func-
tional dependencies and are assumed to be more vulnerable to stressors
causing death. Thus, when a younger person dies of unexplained causes,
the cause of death is almost always carefully analyzed. The death of an
older person, however, is rarely as carefully scrutinized, if at all, regardless
of risk factors or indications of possible abuse or neglect. In addition, old
age often brings medical conditions and physiological attributes that may
mimic or mask the markers of elder abuse and neglect, further complicating
the analysis and detection.
     Despite these many complexities, a recent study—one of the few in the
area—most clearly underscores the importance of increasing our under-
standing of these phenomena. That study (Lachs et al., 1998) demonstrates
that elder abuse and neglect significantly shorten older victims’ lives, even
controlling for all other factors. Incidents of mistreatment that many would
perceive as minor can have a debilitating impact on the older victim. A
single episode of victimization can “tip over” an otherwise productive, self-
sufficient older person’s life. In other words, because older victims usually
have fewer support systems and reserves—physical, psychological, and eco-
nomic—the impact of abuse and neglect is magnified, and a single incident
of mistreatment is more likely to trigger a downward spiral leading to loss
of independence, serious complicating illness, and even death.
     Unfortunately, there is a paucity of primary data relating to forensic
markers of elder abuse and neglect, or even regarding the phenomena them-
selves. The ensuing discussion describes several potential forensic markers
of elder abuse and neglect, including: abrasions, lacerations, bruising,
fractures, restraints, decubiti, weight loss, dehydration, medication use,
burns, cognitive and mental health problems, hygiene, and sexual abuse.
We also are including financial fraud and exploitation because they often
coexist with physical and emotional abuse and neglect. Some of the mark-
ers discussed are actual observations (such as bruises or fractures), whereas
others are descriptions or conclusions based on underlying observations
(for example, sexual abuse is a conclusion that might result from the obser-
vation of a vaginal tear or abdominal bruise, and a conclusion of neglect
might result from the observation of poor hygiene and burns). Some of the
markers are also potential risk factors (for example, self-neglect, cognitive
and mental health problems, and financial abuse). But the current evidence
regarding risk factors does not tell us the amount of risk conferred or by
what mechanism.
     Where evidence-based data or other studies were found relating to the
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                           341

forensic markers discussed in this paper, they are referenced. But the
majority of information on this topic currently is derived from working
hypotheses based on the experience of clinicians and pathologists. Discus-
sion of each factor includes (a) a definition of the phenomenon, (b) a
discussion of how it is affected by age-related changes, and (c) what we
currently know of clinical and forensic markers indicating abuse and ne-
glect.
     The term forensic is defined as pertaining to the law or employed in
legal proceedings. Thus, medical forensic markers of elder abuse and ne-
glect are factors that are relevant to medical and legal determinations of
whether elder abuse or neglect has occurred. Consistent evidence-based
medical definitions are urgently needed to assist health care and social
service professionals in detecting, treating, responding to, referring, and
better understanding this grave and increasingly important public health
problem. Coherent legal definitions are needed for legal and public safety
professionals to determine when the law may have been broken, what types
of criminal, civil, or administrative cases may be pursued, and for lawmak-
ers to determine what new laws should be proposed or enacted. Defining
appropriate forensic markers will lead to more effective prevention strate-
gies and medical, legal, social service, and public safety interventions.
     Expanding our medical forensic knowledge base is vital to all the myriad
ways in which the law is expected to address elder abuse and neglect.
Potential legal interventions include the following: federal, state, and local
law enforcement entities (including prosecutors, investigators, and police)
may pursue criminal and civil cases relating to allegations of elder abuse
and neglect. The government generally pursues such cases in its police
power capacity—to punish, deter, remediate, and/or redress wrongdoing.
Government also may use the law in its parens patrie capacity—pursuing
guardian and commitment cases, primarily intended to protect those who
cannot care for themselves. Almost all cases brought by government enti-
ties in this field rely on medical forensic evidence. Some government enti-
ties (such as the Departments of Justice and Health and Human Services)
have resources to fund projects relevant to medical forensic issues. Private
plaintiffs may file civil suits against health care providers depending on
available medical forensic evidence. Federal and state legislative bodies can
enact laws that provide for funding, create new entities, establish civil and
criminal causes of action, and provide for other measures to address the
problem. Federal and state regulatory bodies determine and/or enforce
reimbursement, licensure, and administrative enforcement rules. Each legal
aspect of this issue would benefit from being informed by more and better
research.
     Elder abuse and neglect are often not detected or diagnosed, precluding
any intervention, including prosecution. Thus research aimed at improving
342                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

detection is crucial to law enforcement. Furthermore, even when there is
detection or diagnosis, cases will not be prosecuted unless the suspected
abuse or neglect is reported (which often is not the case even where there
are mandatory reporting laws). Criminal and civil elder abuse and neglect
prosecutions are pursued for many reasons, including to stop, redress, pun-
ish, and deter the wrongdoing, and to recoup government monies provided
for care that was not rendered. However, the current state of legal, social
science, and medical knowledge does not include an evaluation of which
types of prosecution and which remedies and punishments best address
these goals. By providing the tools necessary to detect and prove these
cases, research on the forensic markers of elder abuse and neglect can help
law enforcement make appropriate cases a priority.


           DETECTING ABUSE AND NEGLECT IN ELDERS
     The American Medical Association (1996) has defined physical abuse
as an act of violence that may result in pain, injury, impairment, or disease.
Neglect is the failure to provide the goods or services necessary for func-
tioning or to avoid harm. A caregiver may be a family member, a friend, or
an employee of the elder or of a nursing or other type of facility, or it may
be the entity responsible for providing care. Definitions and intent stan-
dards may vary depending on discipline, entity, location, or jurisdiction, as
well as the relationship of the victim and the perpetrator. Furthermore,
intent in a legal proceeding is the province of the fact finder (judge or jury)
and therefore opened to argument by both the plaintiff/prosecutor and the
defendant. Thus, the above-provided descriptions are intended as a general
guide and a way to frame the discussion, but not as specific legal defini-
tions.
     Actual abuse or neglect is rarely directly observed by medical, legal, or
protective service professionals. In the absence of eyewitness testimony,
law enforcement must rely on other circumstantial evidence to prove the
existence of abuse or neglect. In most instances the experience of other
direct observers is sought or the circumstances are deduced through inves-
tigation or physical examination. The state of current knowledge, how-
ever, does not always allow health care and social science professionals to
link physical signs with a diagnosis of abuse or neglect. Further research
will help identify and define useful forensic markers to help practitioners
detect and treat elder abuse and neglect victims.
     How, when, why, and by whom injuries have been inflicted on elderly
victims are all important questions to be answered before actors in the legal
system take any affirmative action to protect the victim and deter future
wrongdoing. Thus, a fractured bone may heal and a bruise may resolve
regardless of whether a practitioner can identify the cause. And yet, the
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                             343

cause of the break or the bruise is the starting point for any legal action.
Thus, even where there are clear bad outcomes (harm to an older person),
absent a causal link and evidence to support a hypothesis of illegal abuse or
neglect, the law will provide no remedy or accountability.
     The most extreme cases of abuse and neglect are not diagnostic dilem-
mas. In some cases—gunshot wounds, knife wounds, or rope burns, for
instance—it is clear that the older person has been abused. In other cases
multiple large decubiti or starvation may indicate severe neglect. Bite marks,
too, are established evidence of abuse (Rawson et al., 1984; American
Board of Forensic Odontology, 1986). But most cases fall into a gray area
where abuse and neglect are not so nearly clear-cut, often because of subtle
physiologic and psychological changes that occur in old age.
     No gold standard test for abuse or neglect exists, and those working
with abused or neglected elderly victims rely on forensic markers. The
difficulty with this approach is that there is often a great overlap among the
markers of disease and neglect (and sometimes abuse). Although abuse
often is considered to require an overt act, whereas neglect is considered to
require an omission, it sometimes is difficult to distinguish between the
two. There are cases in which neglect is so profound and widespread, and
the caretaker is knowledgeable of what was needed but not provided, that
many would consider it abuse. For example, if a case includes apparently
preventable decubiti, neglect may be indicated. The line between abuse and
neglect becomes murkier, however, when a person presents with multiple
serious decubiti, and the caregiver was aware of the decubiti and of what
care was needed but still failed to render adequate care. The ambiguity
between abuse and neglect is similarly demonstrated in scenarios where
caregivers, particularly those who know better, either withhold necessary
medication or fail to perform needed care (for example, fail to change a
bandage and cause the loss of part of a limb and/or sepsis, or cause illness
and death by not giving needed insulin).
     The absence of clear and consistent legal definitions of neglect limit our
ability to address the phenomenon. Liability for neglect is dependent on the
ability to assign blame, and blame is easier to assign with acts of commis-
sion than acts of omission (Phillips, 1988). Definitional (and legal) distinc-
tions also are necessary in determining when self-neglect evolves into
caregiver neglect. This is a combined medical-legal inquiry: Is the person
physically or mentally incapacitated? At what point does the legal respon-
sibility for the care of that person shift from self to another? What are the
legal responsibilities of a caregiver under law such that failure to render
such care in a home or community setting subjects the caregiver to civil or
criminal liability? What types of documentation must exist to justify a
failure by caregivers to intervene in the face of self-neglect (e.g., refusal to
eat) in an institutional setting? The answers to these questions, to the
344                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

extent that such answers exist, vary from state to state, and sometimes from
community to community, complicating the analysis and any research of
the issue.
     Resolution of these difficult distinctions is beyond the scope of this
paper. It is worth noting, however, that whether elder abuse and neglect
has occurred is a conclusion drawn from a constellation of factors—some
are medical (the individual’s medical condition), and some are legal (the
jurisdiction’s definition of caregiver neglect). Developing consistent defini-
tions and laws relating to elder abuse and neglect is critical to (a) develop-
ing useful forensic markers, (b) effective detection and diagnosis by health
care professionals, (c) law enforcement’s determination of a violation of
law and of what cases to prosecute, and (d) researchers’ and policy makers’
determination of the scope of the problem and of what new laws (including
causes of action and remedies) and other measures are needed to adequately
address it.
     To the extent that the term forensic is defined as “pertaining to the
law,” medical forensic markers also are relevant to guardianship, involun-
tary commitment, power of attorney, and other types of parens patrie cases.
Because this panel is examining abuse and neglect, however, those applica-
tions of forensic markers are not specifically discussed in this paper.
     Abuse and neglect may occur in community or institutional/residential
settings. For most of the markers described, there is no literature describing
the relevance of various settings to the medical forensic analysis. This, too,
is a topic in need of study.


         POTENTIAL MARKERS OF ABUSE AND NEGLECT
     Fourteen potential markers of elder abuse and neglect are discussed
below, including for each a brief definition, a description of age-related
changes, and a review of what is known about each as a medical forensic
marker of elder abuse and neglect. Most of the forensic markers discussed
in this section apply both to living persons and to postmortem evaluations.
Factors pertaining peculiarly in the postmortem context are discussed in the
next section.


                         Abrasions and Lacerations
    Abrasions are superficial injuries involving the outer layer of skin;
lacerations are characterized by full-thickness splitting of the skin. Abra-
sions are caused by movement of the skin over a rough surface; lacerations
are the result of blunt force (Crane, 2000). Skin tears are a very common
type of laceration seen in the elderly and are defined as a splitting of the
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                          345

epidermis (superficial layer of the skin) from the underlying connective
tissue resulting in a flap of skin (Malone et al., 1991).


Age-Related Changes
     Skin thickness and elasticity decrease with age. Tensile strength also
declines, increasing the susceptibility to shearing-force trauma (Griffiths,
1998). Abrasions can occur in older persons with minor trauma. Common
lacerations in elderly persons are the skin tears that occur most frequently
on the forearms and occasionally on the legs. Persons usually have no more
than one or two skin tears at a time, and skin tears often heal completely
without scarring.
     A primary data study revealed that the annual incidence of skin tears in
a large nursing home was a little less than one per year per resident. The
majority of tears were approximately 0.75 inches in length, though nearly 6
percent were 1.6 inches or longer. Eighty-five percent of the lacerations
occurred on the arms. A known cause was identified in less than half the
cases (47 percent), and most known causes were attributed to falls or
bumping into something; wheelchairs accounted for 30 percent of the inju-
ries (Malone et al., 1991). In cases in which the cause was unknown (53
percent), the skin tears may have occurred accidentally and may not have
been noticed or may have been forgotten by the elder, or they could have
been due to rough handling or worse by staff members and others. This
study included no analysis of the cases with known causes as compared to
those with unknown causes.


Clinical and Forensic Markers Indicating Abuse or Neglect
    Abrasions retain the pattern of the causative agent better than any
other type of injury, and careful documentation by health care personnel is
important for identification of the mode of injury. Skin tears in sites other
than the arms and legs or multiple tears or abrasions should raise suspicion.
Lacerations often heal with scarring (Knight, 1997), as opposed to skin
tears, which heal without scarring. Abrasions or lacerations are most
commonly seen in cases involving physical abuse, although they can occur
in cases of caregiver neglect.


                                  Bruises
    A bruise is the result of blunt force with concomitant rupture of small
blood vessels under the skin. Blood escapes to the surrounding tissues
propelled by the muscular contractions of the heart. Bruises are most
346                                                  ELDER MISTREATMENT

commonly seen in physical abuse but can be a result of caregiver neglect.
Bruises can surface hours to days after an initial insult, depending on the
depth of the wounds. Blood can track through fascial planes and result in
bruises distant from the site of injury. The eyelids, neck, and scrotum are
very susceptible to bruising.


Age-Related Changes
    Bruises often occur more frequently and resolve much more slowly in
older persons than in younger persons and can last for months instead of
the usual one to two weeks (Knight, 1997; Crane, 2000). Langlois and
Gresham (1991) prospectively studied bruising by collecting over 200 pho-
tographs of bruises occurring in persons over the age of 65. They con-
cluded no bruises less than 18 hours old demonstrated yellow coloration (p
< 0.001). The opposite was, however, not true; some bruises did not
develop a yellow color until much later. This primary data study is in-
cluded in the Appendix to Chapter 1.


Clinical and Forensic Markers Indicating Abuse or Neglect
     The pattern of the bruise may suggest the cause of the injury. Bruises
may retain the shape of knuckles or fingers. Parallel marks, called tramline
bruising, indicate injury from a stick (Knight, 1997; Crane, 2000). The site
of the injury may also indicate abuse. The most common locations for
nonaccidental injury are the face and neck, the chest wall, the abdomen,
and the buttocks (Crane, 2000). Intentional injury was determined in a
retrospective review of random charts in New Zealand to be 13 times more
likely to involve the head than other areas of the body. In this study
internal injuries were two times as common in the assault victims (Fanslow
et al., 1998). Bruising on the palms and soles may serve as forensic markers
since the tissue at those sites is made of tough fibrous tissue and is not
usually injured accidentally (Knight, 1997).
     The color of the bruise is usually unhelpful for dating because two
bruises in the same person may heal at different rates. Reddish blue, blue,
or purplish bruises are more likely to be recent while bluish green, greenish
yellow, and brown bruises are more likely to be in some stage of healing
(Crane, 2000). Multiple bruises in various stages of healing may indicate
physical abuse (Knight, 1997).
     Bruises are common sequelae of falls, the most common cause of injury
in older persons. Abusive or neglectful caregivers often attribute inten-
tional bruises to a fall. Falls, however, cannot always be prevented and
have multiple causes, such as poor vision and transient ischemic attacks.
The causes of any given fall in an elder should be evaluated and the results
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                              347

of the fall, such as the type of bruising or fracture, may be forensic markers
worthy of study and provide useful information about whether abuse or
neglect was involved.


                                   Fractures
    Fractures are broken bones and include a frank severing of the bone or
a compression of intact bone.


Age-Related Changes
     The bones of older persons are thinner and less dense, making them
more susceptible to fractures as the result of bone disease or injury. Poor
nutrition, vitamin D deficiency, alcoholism, and age-related sex hormone
deficiencies also contribute to an increased propensity to fractures (Francis,
1998). Other bone diseases such as osteoporosis and all its causes, such as
chronic steroid use, osteomalacia, and Paget’s disease, make the bones
more brittle. Any type of cancer that invades bone weakens the osseous
structure, making the patient more prone to fractures—these are called
pathological fractures. The most common sites of fracture are the hip in
those over the age of 75 and the distal wrist in persons younger than 75
(Francis, 1998). The wrist is a common site of fracture with falls in older
individuals because many use their hands to help break the fall. Older
women in particular are susceptible to vertebral fractures. Alcoholics are
prone to multiple falls with resulting fractures of the arms, legs, and ribs.
     Two types of bone fractures are known to occur spontaneously: verte-
bral fractures in osteoporotic older women, and hip fractures. There are
two series that report cases of hip fracture in which abuse was suspected
but subsequently attributed to medical causes (osteomalacia or soft bones,
prolonged bed rest, Paget’s disease) (Kane and Goodwin, 1991; Connolly et
al., 1995). Prolonged bed rest, chronic limb paralysis, or non-weight-
bearing status put elderly persons at increased risk for spontaneous fracture
(Kane and Goodwin, 1991).


Clinical and Forensic Markers Indicating Abuse or Neglect
    A sizable literature on the resolution of fractures in abused children
exists, but there are little or no data on fracture resolution in elders. Elders’
bones, however, heal at much slower rates, making the child abuse data on
fracture resolution invalid for older adults. Also, 30 percent of community-
dwelling older persons and 50 percent of nursing home patients fall; there-
fore, falls alone should not necessarily increase suspicion of abuse. Most
persons who fall experience one to three falls per year. A person who falls
348                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

once has joined a grouping prone to frequent falls. A detailed examination
of the patient, records, and/or collateral history from caregivers is needed to
determine if fractures in frail elders constitute physical abuse.
     Dentists and oral surgeons often see physically abused patients with
fractured, subluxed, or avulsed teeth or fractures of the zygomatic arch (the
bony structures around the eyes) or the mandible and maxilla (jaw bones)
(Fenton et al., 2000). Fanslow and colleagues (1998) showed in a retro-
spective chart review that fractures of the head, spine, and trunk are more
likely to be assault injuries than limb fractures, sprains or strains, or muscu-
loskeletal injuries in adults. A spiral fracture of a large bone with no
history of gross injury is diagnostic of abuse, as are fractures with a rota-
tional component (Medical Tribune, 1995). Fractures in nonalcoholics at
sites other than the hip, wrist, or vertebrae should raise suspicions of abuse.

                                  Restraints
     Restraints are means of controlling the behavior of older persons, espe-
cially in hospitals and nursing facilities. There are two forms of restraints,
mechanical and chemical. The following discussion refers to mechanical
restrains, such as Posey vests, and wrist and ankle restraints made of leather,
plastic, or cloth.


Standards of Care for Elders
    The only acceptable reason for restraining an elder is to prevent signifi-
cant harm (Knight, 1997). Appropriate restraints help stop the agitated
patient from pulling out a tube that is a conduit for life-saving treatments
such as an endotracheal intubation for mechanical ventilation, oxygen re-
placement, or intravenous fluids and medications.


Clinical and Forensic Markers Indicating Abuse or Neglect
     Abuse or neglect occurs whenever a person is restrained in a noncritical
situation and without a concomitant evaluation by a medical practitioner.
If restraints are determined to be necessary, the restrained patient must be
monitored closely and frequently. The restraints must not be so tight as to
completely restrict movement. Proper bedding must be used to prevent
decubiti (bedsores).
     In many studies, physical restraint is very strongly associated with
increased injury and death (Miles, 1996; Mohr and Mohr, 2000). Re-
straints, in fact, often do not control behavior and instead may result in a
worsening of behavioral problems. Despite this evidence, many health
professionals still believe that restraints will help prevent injury due to
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                            349

falling. Restraints can be a form of neglect when used in lieu of adequate
caretaking because they render persons “easier” to care for. They can be a
form of physical abuse, for example, when they leave scars or result in wrist
wounds or decubiti.


                                   Decubiti
    The breakdown of skin integrity resulting in an ulcer is known as a
decubitus, or bedsore. Decubiti are the result of circulatory failure due to
pressure; shearing forces cause thrombosis of the microcirculation (clotting
or blockage of blood in small blood vessels), resulting in tissue necrosis
(Barton and Barton, 1981). Most decubiti occur over the sacrum; the hip
and the heels are also common locations. Although decubiti may be di-
vided into four stages, in general they are either deep or superficial.


Age-Related Changes and Standards of Care
     Normal aging skin has relatively well-preserved blood flow. The eld-
erly are more susceptible to decubiti because of disease states and not on the
basis of age alone (Bennett and Bliss, 1998). Decubiti most often occur in
medically ill or cognitively impaired individuals. Intrinsic causes such as
acute illness, neurological disease, peripheral vascular disease, incontinence,
and poor nutritional status place individuals at higher risk (Bennett and
Bliss, 1998). Although poor nutrition is a risk factor, improving nutritional
status doesn’t always reverse or prevent the process (Henderson et al.,
1992; Finucane et al., 1999). The healing may take weeks to months,
depending on the underlying comorbidities and the extent of the decubiti.
Risk factors for decubiti were found not to be predictive where appropriate
care was provided; however, when the standard of care was not met, risk
factors were found to be predictive (Berlowitz et al., 2001).
     The standard of care for decubitus ulcers is to prevent them from
occurring, particularly in high-risk patients. Prophylactic measures include
turning patients regularly, range-of-motion exercises, appropriate nutri-
tional supplementation, and bedding. New therapies available for treat-
ment including hydrocolloid dressings and hydrogel preparations, are supe-
rior to wet-to-dry dressings and the use of povidone iodine in wounds
(Patterson and Bennett, 1995).


Clinical and Forensic Markers Indicating Abuse or Neglect
    There are divergent views regarding which decubiti are due to illness
and which are due to neglect or even abuse. The failure to adhere to the
standard of care could be due to medical, institutional, or caregiver neglect.
350                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

Deep decubiti in multiple sites also may indicate neglect (Schor et al.,
1995). Failure to provide proper care to high-risk persons may indicate
neglect; if a foul-smelling or necrotic ulcer is not brought to the attention of
a physician and not appropriately cared for, neglect is almost always
present. Preventable decubiti are usually considered to be due to caregiver
neglect, although the number, severity, and lethal result may cause some to
ascribe the findings to abuse.


                                 Malnutrition
    Malnutrition is defined as poor health status due to the decreased
intake of necessary nutrients.


Age-Related Changes
    Old age results in a decline of both smell and taste, which decreases
appetite. Many patients with cancer lose weight regardless of efforts to
maintain nutritional status. Poor health, including poor dentition, depres-
sion, dementia, and malabsorption syndromes, also may contribute to
weight loss and undernutrition (Thomas, 1998). Numerous other disorders
can lead to malnutrition, including strokes, Parkinson’s disease, amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis, and disorders of the esophagus.


Clinical and Forensic Markers Indicating Abuse or Neglect
    Malnutrition often is a marker of caregiver neglect, especially in institu-
tional settings. More than 40 percent loss of body weight can result in
death (Knight, 1997). Inappropriate prescribing of such medications as
anticholinergic drugs (nerve blocking drugs, which cause excessive dry
mouth and confusion), psychotropic drugs, and other medications that
impair mentation or appetite may constitute neglect. Caregivers may fail to
maintain oral hygiene, which can lead to the loss of teeth and poor nutri-
tional intake. Nursing home residents may decline to eat when institutions
do not recognize cultural food preferences. However, the most frequent
cause of malnutrition due to neglect in an institutional setting appears to be
an inadequate number of staff to assist those who need help with eating
(Harrington et al., 2000).
    Similarly, such improper feeding techniques as forceful assistance or
other inappropriate feeding may lead to choking, aspiration, pneumonia, or
death. It may also lead to food revulsion, refusal to eat, and depression,
catalyzing a downward spiral. Appropriate documentation is required
where the explanation for malnutrition is refusal to eat. Malnutrition may
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                          351

be an important predisposing factor for other illness or death and may be
due to mismanagement of persons living in nursing homes (Hood, 2000).


                               Dehydration
    Dehydration, inadequate level of water in the body, is caused by de-
creased fluid intake or excessive water loss seen commonly in persons living
in very warm climates or in athletes such as marathon runners.


Age-Related Changes
     The elderly are much more prone to dehydration with minimal provo-
cation than are younger people. Dehydration is a common reason for
emergency department visits by older persons (Lowenstein et al., 1986).
Older persons have decreased body water reserves and thirst drive; their
thirst drive may remain depressed even after 12 to 24 hours of water
deprivation. The central nervous system regulation of water is altered;
although antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is secreted properly in response to
volume depletion, the older kidney responds less well to changes in ADH
and continues to excrete water in the face of dehydration (American Geriat-
rics Society Review Syllabus, 1998). Hydration status is particularly diffi-
cult to monitor in older persons who can experience very rapid changes in
their fluid status without much in the way of symptomatology.


Clinical and Forensic Markers Indicating Abuse or Neglect
     In general, in moderate climates, the loss of water results in death
within 10 days (Knight, 1997); this time frame is likely to be much shorter
in the case of older persons.
     Although most commonly caused by a medical illness, dehydration and
volume depletion can serve as forensic markers for abuse or neglect when
withholding food and water or insufficient care is part of the history.
     Confusion and somnolence are common signs of volume depletion or
dehydration, but they are nonspecific indicators and occur in many other
disease states in the elderly. Sometimes the mental changes attributable to
dehydration are subtle, especially in very demented persons. Neglect may
be present if inadequate fluids are offered or provided or if dehydration
goes unrecognized for a long period of time by medical or nursing person-
nel. Neglect also may be present in cases in which caregivers, home or
facility, fail to seek help when problems are apparent. Obvious changes in
the weight or mental states of persons residing in nursing homes and other
care facilities should be assessed carefully. Weight changes or changes in
352                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

vital signs should be brought to the attention of a clinician or otherwise
promptly evaluated. Where the explanation for dehydration in an institu-
tional setting is a refusal of fluids, this should be historically and appropri-
ately documented. As with malnutrition, inadequate staff support may lead
to neglectful, inadequate hydration.


                               Medication Use
    Proper medication use is among the most important strategies for main-
taining good health and preventing adverse side effects in the older indi-
vidual


Age-Related Changes
     Older patients use three times the number of medications that younger
patients use (Monane et al., 1997). They do not respond as predictably to
most medications as younger patients, and they have an increased risk of
adverse side effects. A number of physiologic changes complicate the pre-
scribing of effective yet safe drug regimens in older persons. Older persons
have decreased hepatic metabolism (clearance of drugs through the liver)
and decreased plasma protein binding, which increase drug levels. Older
persons have decreased gastrointestinal absorption, and their bodies, due to
age-related changes in body water, fat, and lean muscle, distribute drugs
differently (Zubenko and Sunderland, 2000). In general, there is more fat
and less water, leading to longer time of action of fat-soluble drugs and
higher abrupt drug concentrations for water-soluble medications.
     Drug regimens in older people are complicated by the fact that often
they include multiple medications, which may interact. In addition, ap-
proximately one-half to one-third of patients do not take their medications
properly (Monane et al., 1997). Patient noncompliance occurs for a variety
of reasons. Some elders may not understand the instructions given. Some
take their neighbors’ medication or overdose on alternative therapies. Oth-
ers may not have the resources (funds, transportation) to obtain needed
medication. The most common form of noncompliance is failure to take or
to renew needed prescriptions.
     Polypharmacy in the elderly, as described by Monane and colleagues
(1997), is the use of any unnecessary medication regardless of the total
number of pills consumed. Conversely, needed medications, such as cancer
chemotherapy, are withheld from older people for fear of side effects. Stan-
dards of care for specific disease states, such as a three-drug regimen for
persons with heart failure or a two-drug regimen for Alzheimer’s disease,
have been established.
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                            353

Clinical and Forensic Markers Indicating Abuse or Neglect
      Misuse of medication, for example, giving a patient too much or too
little of an indicated drug, withholding a necessary medication altogether,
or administering unnecessary or inappropriate medication, may constitute
either neglect or abuse, depending on whether the misuse or withholding
was intentional or an excusable error.
      The forensic markers for abuse or neglect as the result of misuse or
withholding of medication may present in many different ways. In general,
older persons should receive medications in doses smaller than those re-
ceived by younger patients; and thus, in general, a prescription for an older
person of a standard dose of medication may be an indicator of abuse. The
signs and symptoms of medication side effects should be monitored, and
the failure to do so may constitute neglect. Nongeriatricians may not be as
attuned as geriatricians or geriatric nurse practitioners to the signs of drug
overdose in elders because they often use the same drug dosages with
impunity in younger adults. Increasing credentialing for medical practitio-
ners requires proof of age-reliant continuing education and certification
during the licensing procedures. Failure to obtain appropriate training for
the population one is caring for is a potential cause of professional neglect.
      The reasons for adverse side effects are complex and varied. They may
be due to improper dosing, noncompliance, drug-drug interactions, the
different presentation of disease states in the elderly (especially demented
patients), or the particular constellation of disorders in a given patient.
Failure to follow the standards of care indicates abuse or neglect. The
determination of neglect due to medication misuse is best made by a prac-
titioner other than the prescribing doctor.
      Elders may misuse prescription drugs because they lack the capacity to
handle this task or they reject efforts by medical professionals to help them.
Abusive or neglectful caregivers may withhold necessary drugs, use the
elders’ drugs themselves, or overdose patients to keep them quiet and man-
ageable. Insufficient staffing in facilities may result in increased medication
errors and insufficient time to administer medication properly or at all.
Depletion of institutional resources may result in failure to keep reliable
and unexpired stores of necessary medications on the premises, including,
for example, insulin for insulin-dependent diabetics.


                                    Burns
    A burn results from tissue injury following exposure to heat above 50°
C (Knight, 1997). Burns are categorized by the body surface affected and
the depth of tissue destruction.
354                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

Age-Related Changes
     Data from the National Fire Protection Association show that persons
over the age of 65 have twice the national average death rate due to burns.
This risk triples at age 75 and quadruples at age 85. At the U.S. Army
Institute of Surgical Research, at the renowned burn unit of Fort Sam
Houston in Texas, persons over the age of 60 represent 8 percent to 12
percent of all admissions (Bird et al., 1998). In addition, although burn
survival has improved for most age groups, there have been relatively few
gains in burn survival for elderly persons in the past decade.


Clinical and Forensic Markers Indicating Abuse or Neglect
     The association of burns and child abuse or neglect is well documented
(Bowden et al., 1988; Andronicus et al., 1998; Evasovich et al., 1998;
Hultman et al., 1998). Burns in older people also may result from abuse or
neglect. Bowden and colleagues (1988), from the University of Michigan
Burn Center, examined the relationship of adult abuse and neglect to burns.
Seventy percent of the cases were deemed due to neglect and abuse. In a
later study, Bird and colleagues (1998), at the Fort Sam Houston Burn Unit,
found that 40 percent of burn cases occurring in persons over 60 were due
to abuse or neglect, with 36 percent of the cases due to neglect. (See
Appendix to Chapter 1).
     These two studies were conducted retrospectively with relatively small
numbers of patients. Nonetheless, their data are intriguing and suggest that
burns in elders might be a forensic marker for self-neglect and caregiver
neglect as well as abuse. White (2000), in a paper about forensic nurses,
also recommends that burns be considered a marker for elder neglect.


                  Cognitive and Mental Health Problems
     Cognitive and mental health disorders are some of the most pervasive
and clinically challenging problems of old age. The Texas Elder Abuse and
Mistreatment (TEAM) Institute has treated over 300 abused or neglected
elders; the most common cognitive and mental disorders noted are depres-
sion, dementia, psychosis, and alcohol abuse (Dyer and Goins, 2000). Pre-
liminary data from an ongoing cross-sectional research study of neglect
clients not referred to a medical team revealed similar results (Dyer et al.,
unpublished data).
     Dementia is a progressive impairment of memory and other areas of
cognition which results in an eventually reduced ability to care for oneself.
Patients suffering from dementia frequently experience anxiety and depres-
sion early in the disease and delusions and hallucinations in the later stages.
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                              355

Depression is characterized by sadness, decreased appetite, insomnia, and
loss of interest in hobbies. Psychosis is an altered mental state characterized
by delusions and hallucinations. Alcohol abuse exists if the intake of
alcohol impairs social functioning. Substances other than alcohol may be
abused, but in elderly populations, alcohol abuse is most common.
      Self-neglect often accompanies dementia and mental health problems in
older people. It is an important issue that requires additional research, but
it is not addressed in this paper except to the extent that it constitutes a risk
factor for or sign of elder abuse and neglect inflicted by others—in effect, a
forensic marker. Self-neglect may be a risk factor in that it makes victims
more vulnerable to and less able to ward off mistreatment by others who
might prey on them. Similarly, as capacity for self-care decreases, depen-
dence on others increases, and if potential caregivers are either unable or
unwilling to provide assistance, then the risk for being abused and ne-
glected by caregivers increases. Conversely, someone who has been victim-
ized by abuse or neglect may become depressed and in turn lose the desire
or capacity for self-care. Thus, self-neglect also may be a forensic marker
that abuse or neglect has been committed by another person.


Age-Related Changes
Dementia. Dementia is present in 15 percent of persons over the age of 65
and 50 percent of persons over the age of 80 (Abrams et al., 1995a).
Dementia is by definition a loss of function that often results in increased
reliance on others for care. Many with the dementia syndrome refuse
needed care, and/or their children are uneasy with becoming caregivers.

Depression. Depression affects from 15 to 50 percent of older persons.
Institutionalized elders and those with medical illness have the highest inci-
dences of depression, which can be as high as 70 percent following a stroke.
Elderly persons with depression are more prone to psychosis than are
younger persons with depression (Abrams et al., 1995b).

Psychosis. Four to five percent of older adults experience psychosis (Abrams
et al., 1995b). It is most commonly associated with depression, but elders
can experience acute and chronic episodes of paranoid ideation (formation
of paranoid ideas).

Alcohol Abuse. Alcohol abuse is present in up to 5 percent of older persons
and is more common in men than in women. Older adults can become
inebriated at lower levels of alcohol intake than younger adults and are
more susceptible to its ill effects, including malnutrition, gastritis, and alco-
hol dementia (Abrams et al., 1995c).
356                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

Clinical and Forensic Markers Indicating Abuse or Neglect
     Cognitive and mental health disorders affect a large number of aging
persons and can lead to impairment of thinking, memory, functional abil-
ity, and ultimately decision-making capacity. They can prevent persons
from seeking help, advocating on their own behalf, or extricating them-
selves from abusive situations, and they make elders more prone to exploi-
tation by others. Dementia itself and its management can be a stimulus for
abusive action when the family feels or is unprepared or unsupported in the
care of an affected dependent. Ability to serve as a witness or provide
testimony is diminished. Ultimately, the mental states of demented elders
can progress to a point at which they are unable to meet even their most
basic needs.
     Most statistics on this topic are derived from adult protective services
(APS) databases. The definition of mental disorders varies from state to
state, as do the training requirements of APS workers, many of whom are
not health care professionals. Some elders with impairments have other-
wise well-developed social skills and, without formal testing, can escape
notice by physicians and other professionals who care for them. The Na-
tional Elder Abuse Incidence Study asked nonmedical volunteers to com-
ment on depression and dementia based on their opinions. They found
59.5 percent incidence of dementia and 43.6 percent incidence of depres-
sion. Because the reporters were not health professionals nor did they have
any mental health training, the data are estimates and not representative of
actual diagnoses (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1998).
     Self-neglect usually but not always is associated with either dementia or
some type of mental health problem. Individually, and particularly in
combination, these conditions may constitute risk factors for, as well as
signs of, abuse and neglect. In a preliminary analysis by the Texas Depart-
ment of Protective and Regulatory Services, self-neglect and medical neglect
(failure to obtain or have obtained appropriate medical care) cases were
more likely to be associated with other types of elder mistreatment than
were cases of physical or sexual abuse (Dyer et al., 2000a). Self-neglect
may very well represent a part of the continuum where older persons who
are initially declining either functionally, mentally, or both try to care for
themselves. If they can no longer meet their needs themselves, then they
need help from others. Progressive functional decline may result in physical
decline and in some instances institutionalization.

Dementia. Dementia is related to elder abuse and neglect (Benton and
Marshall, 1991; Aravanis et al., 1993; Coyne et al., 1993; Lachs and
Pillemer, 1995). Two primary data studies demonstrated that dementia
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                          357

was an independent risk factor for abuse and neglect (Lachs et al., 1998;
Dyer et al., 2000a). In the study by Dyer and colleagues (2000a), dementia
was noted in 51 percent of neglected or abused patients and only 30 percent
of patients referred to geriatric clinic for other reasons.

Depression. Depression is a significant finding in abused or neglected
patients (Benton and Marshall, 1991; Aravanis et al., 1993; Lachs and
Pillemer, 1995; Dyer et al., 2000a). Dyer and colleagues found an even
greater prevalence of depression than dementia in patients referred for
mistreatment: 62 percent of neglected or abused patients had depression
compared with 12 percent of patients referred for other reasons. Lachs and
coworkers found the same clinical phenomenon using data from Connecti-
cut (personal communication, 2001).

Psychosis. Persons with psychotic disorders are likely to neglect themselves
and to be unable to care for themselves as a result of their delusions and
hallucinations (Lachs and Pillemer, 1995; Dyer and Goins, 2000).

Alcohol Abuse. Alcohol abuse can lead to a failure to fulfill major role
obligations, to alcohol use in situations that are physically hazardous, and
to social or interpersonal problems (American Psychiatric Association,
1994). This pattern of behaviors puts persons at risk of perpetrating or
being the victim of abuse and neglect, especially neglect (Goodyear-Smith,
1989; Fanslow et al., 1998; Marshall et al., 2000). Abuse of substances
other than alcohol may have similar consequences.


                                 Hygiene
    Medical practitioners consider hygiene, defined as the ability to main-
tain cleanliness, an important component of good health and disease pre-
vention.


Age-Related Changes
     There are no changes in one’s hygiene that occur strictly with age.
Occasionally, impaired eyesight may make it more difficult to keep one’s
home or clothes clean; however, if cognitive ability remains normal, elders
are able to perform the activities of daily living and maintain appropriate
hygiene. Demented or psychotic individuals, on the other hand, often lack
the ability to care for themselves, and depressed individuals may become
less inclined to care for themselves and display poor personal hygiene.
358                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

Clinical and Forensic Markers Indicating Abuse or Neglect
     Many have suggested that a decline in hygiene is a marker of neglect
(Aravanis et al., 1993; Lachs and Pillemer, 1995; Butler, 1999; Marshall et
al., 2000). Individuals may present with dirty clothes that reek of animal
excrement; multiple insect bites due to mosquitoes, scabies, or fleas; or
other signs of poor hygiene. For some persons, poor personal care is a
matter of lifestyle or choice, and should not be blamed on age. Thus, this
finding requires investigation of previous habits and any recent decline as
well as screening for dementing or psychotic illness.


                                Sexual Abuse
     Sexual abuse is characterized by sexual contact or exposure without the
person’s consent, including those cases in which persons are not able to
consent (American Medical Association, 1996). Mickish (1993) catego-
rized sexual abuse as the least perceived, acknowledged, detected, and re-
ported type of elder abuse. Although the least frequently reported type of
elder mistreatment (Tatara, 1993; Pavlik et al., 2001), it is nonetheless
heinous. Several studies have demonstrated that the overwhelming major-
ity of victims have cognitive impairment (75 percent to 77 percent) and/or
have functional limitations (67 percent to 92 percent) (Ramsey-Klawsnik,
1991; Holt, 1993; Teaster et al., 2000). In the study by Teaster and
colleagues (2000), which includes APS reports from 1996 to 1999, the most
common form of sexual abuse was sexualized kissing and fondling but
ranged from unwelcome sexual interest to rape.

Age-Related Changes
    Women experience a number of physiologic changes in the genital tract
as they age. Both progesterone and estrogen levels decline with aging
(American Geriatrics Society Review Syllabus, 1998). Decreased estrogen
levels result in changes in the shape of the vagina, increased vaginal dryness,
and thinning of the vaginal walls. These changes may cause pain and
bleeding during sexual intercourse. Such age-related changes as altered
acidity of the vaginal secretions and decreased estrogen levels make older
women more prone to spontaneous vaginal and bladder infections (Butler
and Lewis, 1998). Note, however, that there is never a situation in which
sexual abuse is considered normal, regardless of the age or functional status
of the individual.
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                           359

Clinical and Forensic Markers Indicating Abuse or Neglect
     Victims of sexual abuse may present oral venereal lesions. Bruising of
the uvula (Marshall et al., 2000) and bruising of the palate and the junction
of the hard palate may indicate forced oral copulation (Fenton et al., 2000).
Bleeding and bruising of the anogenital area as well as difficulty in sitting
and walking may indicate sexual abuse in elderly women (Fulmer et al.,
1984).
     A retrospective descriptive study of reported cases of sexual assault
from New Zealand looked at women and children, including some elderly
women ranging in age from 60 to 83 years. One-third of women were
assaulted in their homes, and one-third were intoxicated at the time of the
assault. Fifty percent were restrained, and 75 percent had evidence of
trauma. The most common site of bruising, inflammation, tenderness,
abrasions, or trauma was the anogenital area (41 percent of cases). The
remainder of the cases involved other parts of the body, with no particular
site injured more frequently than another (Goodyear-Smith, 1989). Other
types of bruising, for example, on the abdomen, might be suggestive of
sexual abuse (Burgess, 2000). New diagnoses of sexually transmitted dis-
ease in nursing home residents or other elders may indicate abuse. Urinary
tract infections in nursing home residents may indicate sexual abuse if
several cases occur in a cluster. Behavioral signs indicating potential sexual
abuse may include withdrawal, fear, depression, anger, insomnia, increased
interest in sexual matters, or increased sexual or aggressive behavior.

                     Financial Fraud and Exploitation
     Financial exploitation is the inappropriate use of an elderly person’s
resources for personal gain (American Medical Association, 1996). Finan-
cial fraud and abuse make up 12.3 percent of reports to protective service
agencies (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1996).


Age-Related Changes
   There is never a situation in which financial exploitation is considered
normal, regardless of the age or functional status of the individual.


Clinical and Forensic Markers Indicating Abuse or Neglect
    Paveza and his colleagues (1997) have studied the types of financial
exploitation and the associated variables. They have determined that risk
factors vary with the type of financial abuse; however, in general the vic-
360                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

tims are often widows or widowers, often in the seventh or eighth decade of
life, and living in the community.
      Financial exploitation includes credit card and telemarketing fraud,
predatory lending, and theft or extortion. Such activities are usually tar-
geted at vulnerable older adults and may leave them unable to pay for
medications, health care, food, and the other necessities of life. Evidence of
signing over of deeds or changes in wills should raise suspicion of exploita-
tion as should the transfer of personal belongings or material goods with-
out consent (Fulmer and Birkenhauer, 1992). The level of suspicion for this
type of abuse should be increased for persons with cognitive impairment,
which predisposes the victim to be trusting of caregivers, relatives, and
acquaintances (Tueth, 2000). It is believed that many cases of financial
exploitation go unrecognized and occur in conjunction with other types of
abuse and neglect.


 SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN THE POSTMORTEM ANALYSIS
    The mandate of the medical examiner or coroner is to determine the
cause and manner of death. Determining the cause and manner of death
involves not only a physical examination and/or autopsy in many cases but
also extensive investigation, review of medical records, toxicology testing,
and such special studies as radiology, cultures, or serology.


                          Postmortem Evaluation
     Many of the same potential markers for elder abuse and neglect set
forth above in the context of evaluation of living persons also apply in a
postmortem evaluation but are limited by inability to interview the patient
and evaluate such things as mental status and capacity. External examina-
tion should include an objective evaluation of the state of nutrition, includ-
ing evaluation of markers for hydration, utilization of vitreous electrolytes
to confirm visual evaluation, and documentation of cleanliness. A body
with crusted fecal material and secretions or dirt in creases, which is clad in
very clean or new-appearing clothing should suggest an attempt to disguise
poor hygiene and living conditions. Documentation of decubiti, if present,
should include measurements of size, depth, and location. Documentation
of bruising, skin lacerations, and fractures should include a detailed de-
scription of the size, color, extent, and location of these injuries.
     The lessons learned in the examination of child abuse may also apply
here. Locations, extent, type, and multiplicity of injuries may suggest
nonaccidental mechanisms or repetitive abuse. Explanations for multiple
rib fractures such as, “She falls a lot,” are not adequate and may be
inaccurate. Explanations of how injuries occurred must be elicited and
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                            361

compared with the injuries observed. Tendency to multiple falls should be
verified (or refuted) through medical records or objective observations if
possible. Although abrasions and skin tears are common in the elderly,
large skin tears or excessive scarring from more serious lacerations with-
out an adequate explanation is suggestive of inflicted injuries or rough
handling by caretakers.
     Bruising also occurs frequently and may resolve more slowly in older
than in younger persons. Color changes may occur slowly and may persist
for weeks or longer. Loose, thin skin not only may bruise readily, but
bruises can also spread through fascial planes to more distant areas, espe-
cially in such locations as the eyelids, neck, and scrotum. Medical condi-
tions and medications (such as the blood thinners Coumadin and heparin)
may greatly expand the extent of the bruise site. Patterned bruising or
abrasions, when present, may be useful in determining the object(s) causing
the injury. For example, a line of circular bruises on the inner aspects of the
upper arms, especially if present bilaterally, may represent finger marks
from forcibly lifting or pulling a person by the upper arms, such as moving
a person onto or from a bed or a stretcher. Other patterns, such as the
parallel lines caused by impact by a rounded or cylindrical object or an
unusual pattern may be attributable to a specific object.
     Internal examinations may obtain additional evidence relating to po-
tential markers or findings of abuse and neglect. Internal organ examina-
tions should include evaluation of the state of nutrition and hydration, and
evidence of natural disease such as cardiovascular disease, chronic lung
disease, infections, or malignancies. Stomach and bowel contents should be
documented grossly and microscopically. Bones should be evaluated for
osteoporosis and other changes, grossly, microscopically, and radiologi-
cally as indicated. The medical examiner or coroner should perform in-
spection of the external and internal genitalia to evaluate for sexual assault.
Age-related and hormonal changes make the internal and external genitalia
more susceptible to injury by penetration.
     Child abuse protocols are by and large not applicable to adults; how-
ever, protocols for an adequate elder abuse examination could, like that for
child abuse, include total-body x-rays. A complete neuropathology exami-
nation, preferably in conjunction with an experienced neuropathologist, is
necessary to correlate clinical dementia or paralysis with documented gross
and microscopic changes in the brain.


           How Postmortem Forensic Markers May Differ from
                  Those Applicable to Living Persons
   Postmortem examination in many cases provides less information than
would a complete physical examination in a living person. For example, a
362                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

postmortem blood gas evaluation (measuring pH, oxygen, and carbon di-
oxide levels) provides scant if any information, whereas the same test in a
living person may be quite valuable in determining the care needed and the
extent of underlying disease. On the other hand, some postmortem exami-
nation procedures yield more information than physical examination and
laboratory testing of a living patient. Antemortem computerized tomogra-
phy and magnetic resonance imaging scans have significant limitations in
detecting and evaluating such lesions as small central nervous system paren-
chymal or surface hemorrhages or pulmonary nodules. However, utiliza-
tion of radiologic expertise to help document the number and location of
fractures at autopsy can be quite valuable. Although these determinations
in an elderly person with osteoporosis are complex, careful documentation
of such findings along with estimates of age or time of occurrence are
useful. As in evaluations of other types of domestic violence, maxillofacial
(jaw and face) injuries should prompt suspicion of abuse, and estimates of
age or time of occurrence are useful. As in evaluations of other types of
domestic violence, maxillofacial injuries should prompt suspicion of abuse.
      Injuries suggestive of defensive maneuvering, such as those on the back
of the arms and hands, and injuries related to grasping, squeezing, or
forcible restraint should also prompt suspicion (Brogdon, 1998). However,
little is known and there are few studies, if any, that document the type and
location of fractures relative to mechanism and degree of force required in
the elderly. Such studies and published information would also be of great
use to forensic pathologists testifying in court in criminal and civil cases.
      Even if the cause of death may be obvious (for example, pneumonia),
the manner of death (i.e. natural, accident, suicide, homicide, or undeter-
mined) may vary depending on the contributions of other factors to the
pneumonia. For example, if the pneumonia is secondary to rib fractures,
the death could be accidental if the fractures were sustained in an accidental
fall. However, if the rib fractures were numerous and serious enough that
the patient should have received medical attention but no referrals or at-
tempts to get treatment were made, the subsequent death could be consid-
ered the result of neglect and potentially considered a homicide. If
the fractures were sustained in a beating, the manner would clearly be
homicide.


                            Forensic Psychiatry
     Some cases may necessitate a postmortem psychological or psychiatric
evaluation. Although the performance of a psychological or psychiatric
autopsy has been described in some instances of suspected suicides, the
utilization of these somewhat specialized investigative tools has not been
specifically described in investigation of elder deaths. The demonstrated
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                            363

associations of dementia, depression, and self-neglect to elder abuse and
neglect, however, make such autopsies potentially critical tools. Whether
used in their fully developed form by a forensic psychiatrist or incorporated
into a series of extensive death investigation interviews by someone else,
understanding the degree of cognitive impairment or decision-making ca-
pacity, even retrospectively, may be critical in investigating and classifying
a death. The limitations would be that the most important informants
might be those who were perpetuating the abuse or neglect, making them
the least likely to give honest, objective responses. Similarly, indications of
financial exploitation may provide valuable corroborating evidence during
a death investigation.


               OTHER FORENSICS CONSIDERATIONS
    Three additional tools could be tremendously useful in developing and/
or identifying forensic markers of elder abuse and neglect: (1) consistent,
validated screening tools, (2) forensic centers, and (3) multidisciplinary
teams.


                               Screening Tools
     There is general consensus that elder abuse and neglect are significantly
underreported and underidentified, and that validated, uniform tools should
be developed and tested to enhance detection. As set forth below, many
different types of tools currently exist. But absent validation, uniform
standards, and implementation, such tools will not gain general use, pro-
vide an accurate picture of the phenomena, or supply a useful base of data
to be used in research.
     It is essential to screen for elder mistreatment, particularly in older
persons who are either unable, due to cognitive impairment, or unwilling,
due to fear, to report it. Another confounder is that details about alleged
abuse or neglect are derived through proxy interviews and in some circum-
stances the proxy might be the perpetrator. Jones and colleagues (1988)
reported that 72 percent of elder abuse victims did not complain of the
abuse at the time of presentation to an emergency center. The American
Medical Association recommends screening of geriatric patients regardless
of whether they complain of abuse, if physical signs are present (1996).
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services recommends that
hospitals have protocols for screening patients for abuse or neglect. In a
1997 survey of emergency department physicians by Jones and colleagues,
31 percent worked in a department that had protocols, 33 percent worked
in departments without protocols, and 36 percent were unsure. The Joint
Commission on Accreditation of Health Care Organization’s 1992 stan-
364                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

dards require screening protocols for elder abuse as well as domestic vio-
lence and child abuse (Aravanis et al., 1993). Others recommend that
screening for elder mistreatment be a part of the routine health assessment
for all older persons (Fulmer and Birkenhauer, 1992; Mouton and Espino,
1999).
     A number of factors have limited the development of screening tools
for elder mistreatment. The low level of knowledge regarding the phenom-
ena makes it difficult to develop a comprehensive and accurate tool. There
is no gold standard test for elder abuse or neglect. Legal definitions, clinical
experience, and standards relating to elder abuse and neglect vary from
state to state and even from entity to entity. As a result, many cases of elder
abuse and neglect go undetected and unreported, and some benign cases are
reported to involve abuse or neglect (Loue, 2001). Moreover, the process
of substantiating the validity and reliability of such tools is time-consum-
ing, rigorous, and expensive (Wolf, 2000).


Current Screening Tools
    Numerous types of screening tools relevant to elder abuse and neglect
exist, but most professionals collect information on the observations of
others and assess risk factors. The very proliferation of different types of
tools amidst the paucity of evidence-based data is evidence both of the
desire to improve detection and measurement and of the lack of uniformity
among the approaches to this issue. Some of the existing tools will be
briefly described. A few, with special relevance to forensic analysis, will be
described in greater detail.

Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment. Several authors have suggested that
the Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment (CGA) is an ideal tool for evalua-
tion of abused or neglected individuals (Aravanis et al., 1993; Lachs and
Pillemer, 1995; Dyer and Goins, 2000). CGA, an integrated approach to
the screening of conditions in a variety of domains (Siu et al., 1994), re-
quires obtaining a comprehensive history and physical examination, and
the use of validated instruments to quantify measures of psychosocial health
and functional ability. CGA has been shown to be an effective procedure in
at least eight randomized trials in Sweden and the United States (Alessi et
al., 1997). CGA can be performed efficiently in a variety of settings (hospi-
tal, outpatient clinic, nursing home, and private home). A multidisciplinary
team usually conducts the CGA because of the depth and breadth of the
evaluation. The team members always include geriatricians, geriatric nurse
practitioners, and gerontologic social workers and often include therapists,
pharmacists, chaplains, and a variety of other specialists.
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                          365

AMA Assessment Protocol for Physicians. This assessment protocol does
not incorporate any type of screening procedure.

APS Protocols. Eighteen state APS programs have screening protocols for
use by APS specialists, but only four agencies performed any tests of valid-
ity or reliability on their tool (Wolf, 2000).

Risk Factor Checklists. Such checklists have been developed in a variety of
settings (Canadian Task Force on Periodic Health Examination, 1994).
These questionnaires are mostly based on descriptive studies and not on
empirical data. They often do not assess for neglect or address the differ-
ence between disease and abuse.

The Mount Sinai/Victim Services Agency Elder Abuse Project Question-
naire. This tool (1998) developed in New York, is made up of nine closed-
ended direct questions. It is short and easy to administer. Responses,
however, rely on the subjective evaluation of the possible victim, who may
not be forthcoming with or have the cognitive capacity to provide the
personal information it requests. Positive responses should trigger further
evaluation of potential abuse or neglect. This type of tool may be the best
for quick screening in busy emergency centers or clinics.

Elder Assessment Instrument (EAI). This instrument first was developed in
1981 and now includes a checklist assessing five domains, a summary, a
disposition, and a narrative if the examiner is so inclined (Fulmer and
Wetle, 1986). The EAI has a content validity index of 0.83 (Fulmer et al.,
1984) and a reliability index of 0.83 (Fulmer and Wetle, 1986). This
instrument is comprehensive and precise and can be used for serial assess-
ments. Fulmer and colleagues (2000) demonstrated that the sensitivity and
specificity were 71 percent and 93 percent, respectively, when compared
with a panel of experts. The EIA has been used successfully by emergency
department nurses and appears to be ideal for research. The time required
to complete the form’s detailed inquiries make it less likely to be used by
physicians in busy, acute medical settings (such as emergency departments)
and more likely to be used in settings such as geriatric outpatient clinics.

Brief Abuse Screen for the Elderly (BASE). This tool contains five brief
questions that take only a minute to complete (Reis and Nahmiash, 1998).
It is coupled with training and designed to screen elders who are either
caregivers or care receivers. Reis and Nahmiash (1998) report a 86 percent
to 90 percent agreement by trained practitioners and a correlation between
abusive and nonabusive caregivers. The BASE may be useful in busy clini-
cal settings.
366                                                  ELDER MISTREATMENT

Indicators of Abuse Screen (IOA). This tool began as a 48-item checklist
and has been reduced to a 29-item list (Reis and Nahmiash, 1998). It is a
subjective measure that requires an experienced and trained administrator
and two to three hours to complete. A multidisciplinary committee consen-
sus panel reviewed the initial subsample. Cronbach alpha tests demon-
strated an internal consistency of 0.92 and 0.91 on two separate samples
(Reis and Nahmiash, 1998). According to Wolf (2000), the IOA identified
78 percent to 84 percent of senior abuse cases seen by a health and social
service agency. It appears to have great potential as a research tool but is
too lengthy to be used by most medical, social service, APS, or ombudsman
personnel.

Hwalek-Sengstock Elder Abuse Screening Test (H-S/EAST). This test ini-
tially pooled and distilled over 1000 items into a 15-item tool to measure
physical abuse, vulnerability, and potential abusive situations (Wolf, 2000).
The tool was further trimmed to six items based on discriminant analysis
(Neale et al., 1991). Based on an additional study (Scofield et al., 1999),
the researchers suggested six questions suitable for a brief screening tool.


Special Issues Relating to Screening Tools
    Several specific factors make development of appropriate tools to screen
for markers of elder abuse and neglect simultaneously vital and very com-
plex.

Dementia, Depression, Psychosis, and Substance Abuse. Several authors
recommend screening for dementia, depression, psychosis, and substance
abuse in older people to assess the risk of abuse and neglect. The TEAM
Institute Battery includes the Mini-Mental State Examination, the Geriatric
Depression Scale, the Clock Drawing Test, the Brief Psychiatric Rating
Scale, and the CAGE questionnaire for their ease of administration during
house calls and in busy clinics and for the interrater reliability (Dyer and
Goins, 2000; Marshall et al., 2000). Failure to rule out reversible causes of
these cognitive and mental health disorders also may indicate neglect.

Assessment of Decision-Making Capacity. The factors listed above, alone
or in combination, may diminish the elder’s capacity to participate fully in
his or her own decision making. In addition, acute illness can reduce an
older person’s ability to make rational and informed decisions. Diminished
decision-making capacity is a complex factor faced by law enforcement,
adult protective service specialists, and medical personnel who deal with
abused or neglected older persons, for example, when a patient with dimin-
ished capacity decides against hospital transport, resulting in inadequate
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                            367

medical care, worsening suffering, exacerbation of an illness or injury, or
even death (Persse, unpublished data). In our society, patients have the
legal right to be presumed competent, and evidence to the contrary must be
presented before that right can be curtailed or removed. A competent
individual has the right to be a fully informed participant in all aspects of
decision making and, of course, has the right to refuse treatment. It is
important to honor the choices of elders with capacity without abandoning
those who lack capacity and whose expressed choices may lead to harm or
even death. The determination of neglect versus poor choices hinges on an
elder’s capacity to participate in his or her own care, a situation on which
statutes do not provide clear guidance (Loue, 2001). Aravanis and col-
leagues (1993) along with Benton and Marshall (1991) recommend capac-
ity assessment for mistreated elders.
     There are no easily administered standard tools that assess capacity.
The gold standard is psychiatric interview, which is a process that takes
hours and requires a specialist, rendering it impractical. A shorter, but still
accurate and sufficiently sensitive, screening tool is needed to assist in
assessing capacity and identifying those at highest risk.

Assessment Tools for Different Living Situations. Screening tools that
presume normal or near-normal cognition are not useful in environments
where many or most individuals do not have normal cognition. Screening
tools designed for use in nursing homes and other care facilities (where the
onus is less on family and friends and more on health professionals and
institutional culture) have a different focus from screening tools for those
cared for at home. Three care options exist: (a) provide care for oneself in
one’s home, (b) obtain care from a caregiver in the community, and
(c) move to an institution or alternative setting such as a nursing home
where basic daily needs can be met (Loue, 2001). Studies are needed to
evaluate whether the assessment should differ based on whether the indi-
vidual lives in a nursing home, at home, or in a community setting (assisted
living home, group home, etc.).
     Assessment of the environment is one of the key indicators for abuse by
APS specialists (Toronjo et al., unpublished data). In a study of abused or
neglected children, Watson-Perczel and colleagues (1988) found homes with
large amounts of garbage, dirty clothes, spoiled food, and feces. They used
the Checklist for Living Environments to Assess Neglect (CLEAN) home
assessment tool to measure home conditions and to monitor subsequent
clean-up efforts. Perhaps such an evaluation could be modified for cases of
elder neglect.
     Screening tools are not acid tests for mistreatment. As Fulmer and
colleagues point out in a 1984 publication, without knowledge of the spe-
cific situation, judgment about abuse or neglect cannot always be rendered.
368                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

In any screening tool the context and the social situation of each individual
case must be explored.

Postmortem Screening Tools. Injuries leading to morbidity or mortality in
the older population should be investigated to determine whether the sever-
ity of the injury is compatible with the reported mechanism of injury.
Screening tools that have been and are being developed for evaluating
injuries in living populations are useful in some cases of suspected fatal
abuse or neglect but are not always applicable in the postmortem evalua-
tion. Developing and evaluating a standardized tool for performing a
psychological autopsy, especially one directed toward determining the de-
gree of dementia, cognitive impairment, and decision-making capacity be-
fore death, are worthwhile goals.
    In sum, although many instruments and protocols exist, they are a
disparate group, and do not, taken together, achieve the uniformity neces-
sary to support an effective and coherent response from the medical, social
service, public safety, and legal communities. These communities must
work together to encourage and support research into, and development of,
uniform, validated screening tools. (See recommendations below.)


                              Forensic Centers

Overview of Forensic Centers
     Forensic centers have been developed to address and study numerous
categories of illegal conduct usually associated with complex social prob-
lems as diverse as child abuse and neglect, sexual abuse, terrorism, food
tampering, and computer crime. These centers are intended to bring to-
gether multidisciplinary groups of leading experts in their fields; to use
state-of-the-art science, analytic tools, and techniques; to identify wrongdo-
ing; to support law enforcement; to provide diagnostic resources; to con-
duct research and training; and to advance understanding in the specific
field.
     As such, forensic centers can be and have been a very useful tool in
bringing a specialized multidisciplinary approach (and dedicated funding)
to addressing, understanding, and redressing various vexing issues. The
authors uncovered no forensic center in this country dedicated to elder
abuse and neglect. As the discussion above demonstrates, elder victimiza-
tion involves complex phenomena. A forensic center, where expertise,
attention, and new funding could be focused, could advance understanding,
treatment, and research as well as detection, intervention, and prosecution
of elder abuse and neglect. It could also provide concentrated expertise,
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                           369

which others could use as a resource until more information is better dis-
tributed among the relevant practitioners.


Potential Models for Elder Abuse and Neglect Forensic Centers
National Forensic Center. A national forensic center would bring together
leading experts in geriatrics, gerontology, forensic pathology, nursing, law
enforcement, and other relevant fields. Time and funding would be dedi-
cated to the diagnosis of and response to elder abuse and neglect, to re-
search and training in its related fields, and to its prosecution. The center
would conduct postmortem evaluations, consultations with living patients
(using videoconferencing, if necessary), and interviews to answer questions
relating to elder abuse or neglect. Medical records, samples, and other
relevant data could be sent to the center for evaluation.

Regional Forensic Center. A regional center would be similar to the pro-
posed national center, except it would be organized on a regional basis.

Local Forensic Center. The local forensic center model would be much
more localized. It could consist of a mobile unit or team, including a
physician, an APS specialist, and possibly a forensic or law enforcement
specialist, that could be dispatched to the home or facility where the poten-
tial victim was located to do an on-site evaluation. Data could be collected
and analyzed from several sites as part of a pilot project as well.


                          Multidisciplinary Teams

Multidisciplinary Screening Teams
     While not an instrument per se, multidisciplinary team assessment and
treatment has been suggested by many as the ideal approach to elder abuse
and neglect (Fulmer, 1989; Dyer and Goins, 2000). Mount Sinai Hospital
has had a multidisciplinary elder abuse team for over 10 years (Fulmer et
al., 2000). Baylor College of Medicine’s team has been in place for over 6
years. Other sites, including the University of California at Irvine and the
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School of New Jersey, also have well-
developed teams. Interdisciplinary comprehensive geriatric assessment
(CGA) teams are available in most regions throughout the United States
and employ a well-validated, well-accepted approach to frail elders. It only
makes sense that these gerontological experts care for neglected elders, who
are the frailest of the frail. Although there is no published outcome study of
CGA and elder abuse, Dyer and colleagues (unpublished data) have pre-
370                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

liminary data that showed that CGA reduced the prevalence of elder abuse
and neglect at six months and greatly increased the assessment of self-
related health by the victim.


Multidisciplinary Forensics Teams
    A handful of locations around the country have created multidisciplin-
ary teams to review and respond to suspected cases of elder abuse and
neglect. These teams are not only capable of providing a better coordinated
intervention and response than unaffiliated professionals working outside a
team structure, but they also are developing experience and expertise in
supplying a more sophisticated forensic analysis than was previously avail-
able, thereby increasing the likelihood that legal action is pursued and
successful in appropriate cases. Multidisciplinary forensic teams may be
employed to useful end in a variety of other contexts, for example as elder
fatality or serious injury review teams. Because there are so few such teams
and because the data are so scarce, multidisciplinary efforts dedicated to
addressing elder abuse and neglect should be studied, encouraged, and
supported.


                RECOMMENDATIONS FOR RESEARCH
     As a supplement to primary research in this area, it is critical to ensure
that a validated evaluative component is built into all promising practices,
innovative programs, and other efforts, so that results can be measured and
others have ready access to outcome data. Given the nascent state of the
field, the areas for potential research are plentiful. Only a sampling of
potential areas of study are discussed here.

                  Research to Establish Forensic Markers
     The need for research to develop medical forensic markers of elder
abuse and neglect is urgent. That research is the threshold to detection and
diagnosis, without which reporting, intervention, and prosecution are im-
possible. Unless we develop benchmarks giving practitioners the tools to
recognize elder abuse and neglect, we cannot measure or address the prob-
lem. Such research should result in data that provide guidance to health,
social service, and public safety professionals on the location, pattern, color,
marking, severity, natural history, and other characteristics of injuries asso-
ciated with elder abuse and neglect. Some of these factors (for example,
medication misuse and cognitive and mental health problems) should be
evaluated both as forensic markers and in terms of whether and to what
extent they constitute risk factors for being a victim or a perpetrator of
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                           371

elder abuse and neglect. Mortality rates associated with each marker also
should be evaluated.
    This research, among other things, should determine in a scientific
manner the difference between age and unavoidable disease-related changes
versus abuse and neglect. Very few studies of any of the 14 factors listed
below have been done; more are needed. For example, descriptive studies
of skin tears are needed that compare those with known causes to those
with unknown causes. Burnight (2000) has suggested a national database
of witnessed injuries. Many forms of trauma could be studied, beginning
with witnessed falls, which occur commonly in hospitals and nursing homes.
Research protocols should be designed to provide information applicable to
minority populations and to both genders. The study by Langlois and
Gresham (1991) was limited to whites; a study of bruising is needed for
people of color. A few suggestions (there are many more) for research
needed relating to the markers discussed in this paper include the following:


Fractures
     The significance of type and location of fractures is not well understood
relative to mechanism and degree of injury. Objective documentation of
the degree and ensuing impact of osteoporosis is needed. Research into
osteoporosis to determine its objective documentation postmortem and
how it affects fracturing, mechanisms (i.e., degree of force required) would
be useful to the forensic analysis.


Burns
     The findings on burns and elder abuse or neglect are intriguing and
could be further studied at U.S. burn centers. The high incidence of burns
in cases of self-neglect raises the question: When does a history or propen-
sity of an elder to set fires give rise to a duty by a caregiver to intervene?
This inquiry would benefit from research to develop forensic markers to
guide the analysis. The high mortality rates in elders as a result of burns
make this public health issue a compelling research topic.


Cognitive and Mental Disorders
    The existing data on cognitive and mental disorders raise many re-
search questions. What is the impact of cognitive and mental disorders in
cases of abuse or neglect? What is the prevalence of dementia, depression,
and psychosis in abused or neglected individuals or perpetrators? Are
mortality and morbidity higher in persons with cognitive or mental disor-
ders? Because dementia and alcoholism are treatable and depression and
372                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

psychosis are curable, interventions derived from trials may decrease or
even reverse some cases of elder abuse and neglect.


Elder Sexual Abuse
     To improve recognition of elder sexual abuse, researchers need to de-
velop precise anatomic diagnostic criteria, something that is yet to be deter-
mined for child sexual abuse (Kerns, 1998). Studies are needed comparing
anogenital examination findings and psychological characteristics in sexu-
ally abused elders with findings in examinations of those who participate in
consensual sexual relations.
     Studies in each of the additional categories below should be conducted
to determine what physical and behavioral signs should catalyze further
examination, inquiry, and possible reporting by caregivers. The categories
include: abrasions and lacerations, bruises, restraints, decubiti, malnutri-
tion, dehydration, medication use, self-neglect, and financial fraud and
exploitation. Additional studies should be conducted to determine what
other markers should be added to the list (for example, contractures).


         Research on Distinctions in Medical Forensic Markers in
                    Home Versus Residential Settings
    The study of these forensic markers in caregiver neglect is difficult
because so many variables are involved. Some caregivers may neglect
patients because of a lack of knowledge, resources, training, assistance, and
available time due to competing responsibilities. Others may neglect inten-
tionally or sadistically. In the institutional context, a corporate decision
maker may order cutbacks that result in neglect. Research is needed to
develop appropriate standards of care for caregivers that are meaningful
and achievable regardless of socioeconomic status.
    Most of the adverse events that happen to frail elders are not the result
of abuse or neglect. Tracking of data on adverse and unexpected events is
important in determining standards for such incidents and is already per-
formed by state and federal agencies. Intermingled with data on, for ex-
ample, falls, may be data on bruises and fractures that occurred because of
abuse or neglect unbeknownst to investigators. Gurwitz and colleagues
(1994) have collected data on adverse and unexpected events in long-term
care settings. A study in which investigators collect a single stream of data,
screen data for abuse and neglect, and compare positive cases to negative
cases may give results that are more accurate.
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                           373

                             Assessment Tools
     The lack of statutory or well-studied screening instruments can result in
highly subjective standards by mandated reporters, leaving prosecutors with
very little hard evidence on which to base their cases (Loue, 2001). Health
care providers and social services agencies may not reach the people who
need them most if cases of abuse and neglect cannot be adequately identi-
fied.
     Research is vital to creating validated, uniform screening tools. The
lack of a gold standard requires using alternative methods for validating
tools, such as a lead standard. One lead standard might be an expert
consensus panel. Consideration should be given to developing (a) a form
with a short format for busy environments, such as emergency centers, with
questions applicable to all elders; (b) a form applicable to community-
dwelling elders; and (c) a form suited to residents of institutions. These
various forms are required because we do not know what risk different
settings confer.
     A second form with a long format, also validated and uniform, should
be developed with a structure similar to that of a, b, and c above. The long
form would be intended to be used by those who historically take a lengthy
interview, such as protective service specialists or ombudsmen. The long
form could serve as a research tool in conjunction with the short form if the
individual appears to be at high risk for abuse or neglect. Screening for all
elders, coupled with targeted comprehensive assessment in high-risk popu-
lations, may be the most practical and fruitful approach.
     Finally, comprehensive geriatric assessment is already a well-validated
procedure for assessing and intervening in the care of frail elders and merits
study in populations of abused or neglected individuals.
     Just as in the evaluation of potential abuse and neglect in living per-
sons, there is a need for development of screening or evaluation tools that
are specifically useful in the postmortem setting. For example, research
could compare the number, location, and type of fractures incurred in
documented accidental situations versus those encountered in the setting of
inflicted injury. It is intriguing to think that there might be biological
markers of elder abuse or neglect. While the need for epidemiological
research on screening and assessment tools is clear, it does not preclude
searching for other objective laboratory measures.


             Mortality Data for Abused and Neglected Elders
    Although a 100 percent autopsy rate, including proper investigation,
review of medical records, consultation with specialists, including geriatri-
374                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

cians, odontologists, radiologists, and other specialists would be ideal to
obtain baseline information, it is not practical financially and would over-
whelm most medical examiner/coroner systems. Consideration should be
given to a pilot study using statistically selected cases for investigation and
autopsy to determine the prevalence of abuse and neglect and their contri-
bution to death in an autopsied elderly population.
    Medical examiners and coroners should exchange information with
geriatricians and others, including being active members of multidisciplinary
teams to review deaths, review reporting mechanisms, and identify system
issues that work for and against adequate reporting and intervention. De-
velopment of additional scientific literature on all markers would be useful
to support a medical examiner’s diagnoses and conclusions when chal-
lenged in court. It would be useful to study what number or percent of
cases of elder abuse and neglect contributing to death are not investigated
or autopsied. This research likely will require predicate research into the
markers to enhance detection in the first instance.


             Research Regarding Certification of Elder Deaths
     To ensure better certification of elders’ deaths, researchers should docu-
ment aspects of aging that are natural and compare them with features of
injury due to accidental mechanisms and to malevolence. Training in rec-
ognizing signs and typical features of abuse and neglect is important for
medical examiners, coroners, death investigators, law enforcement, and
those who first respond to emergency calls reporting deaths, and should be
enhanced. Policy makers should consider expanding elder death manda-
tory-reporting laws beyond institutional cases. Development of standard-
ized protocols for examination of deaths in elders, particularly when there
is a suspicion of abuse or neglect, is fundamental and could benefit from the
expertise of all health care professionals concerned about fatal abuse and
neglect of the elderly.


                           Legal Issues for Study
    Research is needed to determine what types of criminal, civil, and
administrative cases best protect elders in all settings. To date, there has
been no research on the efficacy of current laws and existing remedies or
how to develop more effective ones.


Reporting
    There is a wide divergence of views regarding whether reporting of
elder abuse and neglect should be mandatory, whether mandatory-report-
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                           375

ing laws should be aggressively enforced, and regarding the efficacy, in
general, of mandatory reporting. In addition, some states have specific
reporting requirements, such as the Arkansas law requiring immediate re-
porting of deaths of nursing home residents. Research protocols should be
developed that inform this debate and to track the impact and efficacy of
reporting laws.


Developing Experts in Forensic Geriatrics
    Development of a group of forensic pediatricians has reportedly im-
proved detection, diagnosis, reporting, and prosecution of child abuse and
neglect. Pilot programs to train a group of forensic geriatricians, and to
identify what types of programs are most effective, should be developed
and tested.


Screening Tools, Forensic Centers, and Multidisciplinary or
Interdisciplinary Teams
    As discussed earlier in this paper, each of these potential tools should
be the subject of study to determine how best to construct screening tools,
forensic centers, and multidisciplinary/interdisciplinary teams (including
fatality and serious-injury review teams), likely including several pilot or
demonstration projects in several sites. A predicate for such research would
be to examine and evaluate what is known about screening tools, forensic
centers, and multidisciplinary/interdisciplinary teams used in other areas,
such as child abuse and neglect, sexual abuse, and domestic violence.
    There are many more areas of needed study and many more recommen-
dations could be made. The reader is directed to Elder Justice Roundtable
Report (2000).


                              CONCLUSION
    Evidence-based forensic markers of elder abuse and neglect have at-
tracted little research interest and therefore remain largely unidentified. No
data exist regarding the number of documented forensic markers or pros-
ecuted cases. A comprehensive research agenda should be developed that
will provide the information needed to help derive accurate clinical and
forensic markers for elder abuse and neglect in both living and deceased
persons, in home and residential settings alike.
    The significantly increased mortality rate for elder victims of abuse and
neglect underscores the pressing need for a national research agenda and
extensive study by the relevant disciplines to address this growing issue.
376                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

                                     REFERENCES
Abrams, W.B., M.H. Beers, R. Berkow, and A.J. Fletcher, eds.
   1995a Cognitive failure: Delirium and dementia. In The Merck Manual of Geriatrics,
             Second Edition. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck & Co.
   1995b Depression. In The Merck Manual of Geriatrics, Second Edition. Whitehouse
             Station, NJ: Merck & Co.
   1995c Alcohol abuse and dependence. In The Merck Manual of Geriatrics, Second
             Edition. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck & Co.
Alessi, C.A., A.E. Struck, and H.U. Aronow
   1997      The process of care in preventive in-home comprehensive geriatric assessment.
             Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 45:1044–1050.
American Board of Forensic Odontology
   1986      Guidelines for bite mark analysis. Journal of the American Dental Association
             112:383–386.
American Geriatrics Society Review Syllabus
   1998      A Core Curriculum in Geriatric Medicine, Fourth Edition 1999-2001. E.L.
             Cobbs, E.H. Duthie, Jr., and J.B. Murphy, eds. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt
             Publishing.
American Medical Association (AMA)
   1996      Diagnostic and Treatment Guidelines on Elder Abuse and Neglect. AA25:96-
             937:4M:12/96.
American Psychiatric Association (APA)
   1994      (DSM-IV) Quick Reference to the Diagnostic Criteria from Diagnostic and Sta-
             tistical Manual-IV. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Andronicus, M., R.K. Oates, J. Peat, S. Spalding, and H. Martin
   1997      Non-accidental burns in children. Journal of the International Society for Burn
             Injuries 24(6)(September):552–558.
Aravanis, S.C., R.D. Adelman, R. Breckman, T.T. Fulmer, E. Holder, M. Lachs, J.G. O’Brien,
and A.B. Sanders
   1993      Diagnostic and treatment guidelines on elder abuse and neglect. Archives of
             Family Medicine 2:371–388.
Barton, A., and M. Barton, eds.
   1981      The Management and Prevention of Pressure Sores. London: Faber and Faber.
Bennett, G.C.J., and M.R. Bliss
   1998      Pressure sores: Etiology and prevalence. In Brocklehurst’s Textbook of Geriatric
             Medicine and Gerontology, Fifth Edition, R. Tallis, H. Fillit, and J.C.
             Brocklehurst, eds. London: Harcourt Brace & Co.
Benton, D., and C. Marshall
   1991      Elder abuse. Clinics in Geriatric Medicine 7(4):831–845.
Berlowitz, D.R., G.H. Brandeis, J.J. Anderson, A.S. Ash, B. Kader, J.N. Morris, and M.A.
Moskowitz
   2001      Evaluation of a risk-adjustment model for pressure ulcer development using the
             Minimum Data Set. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 49(7):872–876.
Bird, P.E., D.T. Harrington, D.J. Barillo, A. McSweeney, K.Z. Shirani, and C.W. Goodwin
   1998      Elder abuse: A call to action. The Journal of Burn Care & Rehabilitation
             19(6):522–527.
Bowden, M.L., S.T. Grant, B. Vogel, and J.K. Prasad
   1988      The elderly, disabled and handicapped adult burned through abuse and neglect.
             Burns, Including Thermal Injury 14(6):447–50.
Brogdon, B.G.
   1998      Forensic Radiology. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                                             377

Burgess, A.W.
   2000      Elder Justice: Medical Forensic Issues Concerning Abuse and Neglect. Paper
             presented at the Department of Justice medical forensic roundtable discussion,
             Washington, D.C., October 18, 2000. Available at: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/
             nij/elderjust.
Burnight, K.
   2000      Elder Justice Roundtable: Medical Forensic Issues Concerning Abuse and Ne-
             glect. Paper presented at the Department of Justice medical forensic roundtable
             discussion, Washington, D.C., October 18, 2000. Available at: http://
             www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/elderjust.
Butler, R.N.
   1999      Warning signs of elder abuse: The family physician may be the patient’s only
             protection from family violence. Geriatrics (March); 54(3):3–4.
Butler, R.N., and M.I. Lewis
   1998      Sexuality in old age. In Brocklehurst’s Textbook of Geriatric Medicine and
             Gerontology, Fifth Edition, R. Tallis, H. Fillit, and J.C. Brocklehurst, eds. Lon-
             don: Harcourt Brace & Co.
Canadian Task Force Periodic Health Examination
   1994      Periodic health examination, 1994 update: 4. Secondary prevention of elder
             abuse and mistreatment. Canadian Medical Association Journal 151:1413–1420.
Connolly, V., A.A. McConnell, and G. McGarrity
   1995      Battered granny or spontaneous fractures? A legal dilemma. Postgraduate Medi-
             cal Journal 71(840):630–632.
Coyne, A.C., W.E. Reichman, and L.J. Berbig
   1993      The relationship between dementia and elder abuse. American Journal of Psy-
             chiatry 150:643–646.
Crane, J.
   2000      Injury interpretation. In Forensic Science: A Physician’s Guide to Clinical Foren-
             sic Medicine, M. M. Stark, ed. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.
Dyer, C.B., and A.M. Goins
   2000      The role of the interdisciplinary geriatric assessment in addressing self-neglect of
             the elderly. Generations 23–27.
Dyer, C.B., V.N. Pavlik, K.P. Murphy, and D.J. Hyman
   2000a The high prevalence of depression and dementia in elder abuse and neglect. Jour-
             nal of the American Geriatrics Society 48:205–208.
Dyer, C.B., V.N. Pavlik, and N.A. Festa
   2000b Elder mistreatment: Analysis of allegation types and variables associated with
             multiple allegations from a statewide database. Published abstract. The annual
             meeting of the American Geriatrics Society, May 20, 2000.
Dyer, C.B., V.N. Pavlik, N.A. Festa, D.J. Hyman, M. Vogel, and E.L. Poythress
   2001      Outcomes of Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment. Baylor College of Medicine,
             Houston, TX.
Elder Justice Roundtable Report: Medical Forensic Issues Concerning Abuse and Neglect
   2000      The Department of Justice medical forensic roundtable discussion, Washington,
             DC, October 18, 2000. Available at: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/elderjust.
Evasovich, M., R. Klein, F. Muakkassa, and R. Weekley
   1998      The economic effect of child abuse in the burn unit. Journal of the International
             Society for Burn Injuries 24(7):642–645.
Fanslow, J., R. Norton, and C. Spinola
   1998      Indicators of assault-related injuries among women presenting to the emergency
             department. Annals of Emergency Medicine 32:341–348.
378                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

Fenton, S.J., J.E. Bouquot, and J.H. Unkel
   2000      Orofacial considerations for pediatric, adult, and elderly victims of abuse. Emer-
             gency Medical Clinic of North America 18(3):601–617.
Finucane, T.E., C. Christmas, and K. Travis
   1999      Tube feeding in patients with advanced dementia: A review of the evidence.
             Journal of the American Medical Association 282(14):1365–1370.
Francis, R.M.
   1998      Metabolic bone disease. In Brocklehurst’s Textbook of Geriatric Medicine and
             Gerontology, Fifth Edition, R. Tallis, H. Fillit, and J.C. Brocklehurst, eds. Lon-
             don: Harcourt Brace & Co.
Fulmer, T.
   1989      Mistreatment of elders: Assessment, diagnosis, and intervention. Nursing Clinics
             of North America 24(3):707–716.
Fulmer, T., S. Street, and K. Carr
   1984      Abuse of the elderly: Screening and detection. Journal of Emergency Nursing
             10(3):131–140.
Fulmer, T., and T. Wetle
   1986      Elder abuse screening and intervention. Nurse Practitioner 11(5):33–38.
Fulmer, T., and D. Birkenhauer.
   1992      Elder mistreatment assessment as a part of everyday practice. Journal of Geron-
             tology Nursing (March):42–45.
Fulmer, T., G. Paveza, I.I. Abraham, and S. Fairchild
   2000      Elder neglect assessment in the emergency department. Journal of Emergency
             Nursing 26:436–443.
Goodyear-Smith, F.A.
   1989      Medical evaluation of sexual assault findings in the Auckland region. The New
             Zealand Medical Journal 102(876):493–495.
Griffiths, C.E.M.
   1998      Aging of the skin. In Brocklehurst’s Textbook of Geriatric Medicine and Geron-
             tology, Fifth Edition, R. Tallis, H. Fillit, and J.C. Brocklehurst, eds. London:
             Harcourt Brace & Co.
Gurwitz, J., M. Sanchez-Cross, M. Eckler, and J. Matulis
   1994      The epidemiology of adverse and unexpected events in the long-term care setting.
             Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 42(1):33–38.
Harrington, C., C. Kovner, M. Mezey, J. Kayser-Jones, S. Burger, M. Mohler, R. Burke, and
D. Zimmerman
   2000      Experts recommend minimum nurse staffing standards for nursing facilities in the
             United States. The Gerontologist 40(1):5–16.
Henderson, C.T., L.S. Trumbore, S. Morharban, R. Benya, and T.P. Miles
   1992      Prolonged tube feeding in longterm care: Nutritional status and clinical out-
             comes. Journal of American College of Nutrition 11:309–325.
Holt, M.G.
   1993      Elder sexual abuse in Britain: Preliminary findings. Journal of Elder Abuse and
             Neglect 5(2):63–71.
Hood, I.
   2000      Elder Justice: Medical Forensic Issues Concerning Abuse and Neglect. Paper
             presented at the Department of Justice medical forensic roundtable discussion,
             Washington, D.C., October 18, 2000. Available at: http://www.ojp. usdoj.gov/
             nij/elderjust.
Hultman, C.S., D. Priolo, B.A. Cairns, E.J. Grant, H.D. Peterson, and A.A. Meyer
   1998      Return to jeopardy: The fate of pediatric burn patients who are victims of abuse
             and neglect. Journal of Burn Care and Rehabilitation 19(4):367–376.
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                                          379

Jones, J., J.D. Dougherty, D. Schelbie, and W. Cunningham
   1988      Emergency department protocol for the diagnosis and evaluation of geriatric
             abuse. Annals of Emergency Medicine 17:1006–1015.
Jones, J.S., T.R. Veenstra, J.P. Seamon, and J. Krohmer
   1997      Elder mistreatment: National survey of emergency physicians. Annals of Emer-
             gency Medicine 30(4):473–479.
Kane, R., and J. Goodwin
   1991      Spontaneous fractures of the long bones in nursing home patients. American
             Journal of Medicine 90:263–266.
Kerns, D.L.
   1998      Triage and referrals for child sexual abuse medical examinations: Which children
             are likely to have positive medical findings? Child Abuse & Neglect 22(6):515–
             18;519–522.
Knight, B., ed.
   1997      Simpson’s Forensic Medicine, Eleventh Edition. New York: Oxford University
             Press, Inc.
Lachs, M.S.
   2000      Elder Justice Roundtable: Medical Forensic Issues Concerning Abuse and Ne-
             glect. Paper presented at the Department of Justice medical forensic roundtable
             discussion, National Institute of Justice, Washington, D.C., October 18, 2000.
             Available at: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/elderjust.
Lachs, M.S., and K. Pillemer.
   1995       Abuse and neglect of elderly persons. New England Journal of Medicine
             332(7):437–443.
Lachs, M.S., C. Williams, S. O’Brien, L. Hurst, and R. Horwitz
   1996      Older adults: An 11-year longitudinal study of adult protective service use. Ar-
             chives of Internal Medicine 156:449–453.
Lachs, M.S., C.S. Williams, S. O’Brien, K.A. Pillemer, and M.E. Charlson
   1998      The mortality of elder mistreatment. Journal of the American Medical Associa-
             tion 280(5):428–432.
Langlois, N.E.I., and G.A. Gresham
   1991      The ageing of bruises: A review and study of the colour changes with time.
             Forensic Science International 50:227–238.
Loue, S.
   2001      Elder abuse and neglect in medicine and law. Journal of Legal Medicine 22:159-
             209.
Lowenstein, S.R., C.A. Crescenzi, D.C. Kern, and K. Steel
   1986      Care of the elderly in the emergency department. Annals of Emergency Medicine
             15:528–535.
Malone, M., N. Rozario, M. Gavinski, and J. Goodwin
   1991      The epidemiology of skin tears in the institutionalized elderly. Journal of the
             American Geriatrics Society 39(6):591–595.
Marshall, C.E., D. Benton, and J.M. Brazier
   2000      Elder abuse: Using clinical tools to identify clues of mistreatment. Geriatrics
             55(2):42–53.
Medical Tribune
   1995      Radiological screens improve detection of domestic violence in patients of all
             ages. December.
Mickish, J.
   1993      Abuse and neglect: The adult and elder. In Adult Protective Service: Reach and
             Practice, B. Byers and J. Hendricks, eds. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
380                                                              ELDER MISTREATMENT

Miles, S.
   1996      A case of death by physical restraint: New lessons from a photograph. Journal
             of the American Geriatrics Society 44(3):291–292.
Mohr, W.K., and B.D. Mohr
   2000      Mechanisms of injury and death proximal to restraint use. Archives of Psychiat-
             ric Nursing 14(6):285–295.
Monane, M., S. Monane, and T. Semla
   1997      Optimal medication use in elders: Key to successful aging. The Western Journal
             of Medicine 167(4):233–237.
The Mount Sinai/Victim Services Agency Elder Abuse Project
   1988      Elder mistreatment guidelines for health care professionals: Detection, assess-
             ment and intervention. New York: Mount Sinai/Victim Services Agency Elder
             Abuse Project.
Mouton, C.P., and D.V. Espino
   1999      Health screening in older women. American Family Physician 59(7):1835-1842.
National Center on Elder Abuse
   1996      Elder abuse Information Series No. 1: Type of elder abuse in domestic settings.
             Washington, D.C. [Online.] Available at: http://www.elderabusecenter.org.
   1998      The National Elder Abuse Incidence Study. Washington, DC: National Center
             on Elder Abuse.
Neale, A.V., M.A. Hwalek, R.O. Scott, and C. Stahl
   1991      Validation of the Hwalek-Sengstock elder abuse screening test. Journal of Ap-
             plied Gerontology 10(4):406–418.
Patterson, J.A., and R.G. Bennett
   1995      Prevention and treatment of pressure sores. Journal of the American Geriatrics
             Society 43:919–927.
Paveza, G.J., C. VandeWeerd, and V. Hughes-Harrison
   1997      Financial exploitation of the elderly: A descriptive study of victims and abusers
             in an urban area. Paper presented at the 50th Annual Scientific Meeting of the
             Gerontological Society of America, Cincinnati, Ohio, November 14–18.
Pavlik, V.N., D.J. Hyman, N.A. Festa, and C.B. Dyer
   2001      Quantifying the problem of abuse and neglect in adults: Analysis of a statewide
             database. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 49:45-48, 2001.
Persse, D.
   no        Patient refusal of transport by emergency medical services. Unpublished data.
   date      Houston Emergency Medical Services, Houston, Texas.
Phillips, L.R.
   1988      The fit of elder abuse with the family violence paradigm, and the implications of
             a paradigm shift for clinical practice. Public Health Nursing 5(4)(December):222–
             229.
Ramsey-Klawsnik, H.
   1991      Elder sexual abuse: Preliminary findings. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect
             3(3):73–90.
Rawson, R.D., R.K. Ommen, K.G. Johnson, and A. Yfantis
   1984      Statistical evidence for the individuality of the human dentition. Journal of Fo-
             rensic Sciences 29:245.
Reis, M., and D. Nahmiash
   1998      Validation of the indicators of abuse (IOA) screen. Gerontologist 38(4):471–
             480.
CLINICAL AND MEDICAL FORENSICS                                                            381

Schor, J.D., A. Selby, and C.A. Bertone
    1995     Geriatric assessment in the diagnosis and treatment of elder abuse. New Jersey
             Medicine 92(2):108–110.
Scofield, M., R. Reynolds, G. Mishra, P. Powers, and A. Dobson
    1999     Vulnerability to abuse, powerlessness and psychological stress among older
             women. (Unpublished report). Callaghan, NSW, University of Newcastle:
             Women’s Health Australia Study.
Siu, A.L., D.B. Reuben, and A.A. Moore
    1994     Comprehensive geriatric assessment. In Principals of Geriatric Medicine and
             Gerontology, W.R. Hazard, E.L. Bierman, and J.P. Blass, eds. New York:
             McGraw-Hill.
Tatara, T.
    1993     Understanding the nature and scope of domestic elder abuse with the use of state
             aggregate data: Summaries of the key findings of a national survey of state APS
             and aging agencies. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 5(4):35–51.
Teaster, P.B., K.A. Roberto, J.O. Duke, and M. Kim
    2000     Sexual abuse of older adults: Preliminary findings of cases in Virginia. Journal of
             Elder Abuse & Neglect 12(3/4):1–16.
Thomas, A.J.
    1998     Nutrition. In Brocklehurst’s Textbook of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology,
             Fifth Edition, R. Tallis, H. Fillit, and J.C. Brocklehurst, eds. London: Harcourt
             Brace & Co.
Toronjo, C., V.N. Pavlik, D.J. Hyman, E.L. Poythress, M. Keith, N.A. Festa, and C.B. Dyer
    no       How adult protective service specialists validate cases of elder neglect. Unpub-
    date     lished paper. Texas Elder Abuse and Mistreatment Institute, Houston, TX.
Tueth, M.J.
    2000     Exposing financial exploitation of impaired elderly persons. American Journal of
             Geriatric Psychiatry 8(2):104–111.
Watson-Perczel, M., J. Lutzker, B. Greene, and B. McGimpsey
    1988     Assessment and modification of home cleanliness among families adjudicated for
             child neglect. Behavior Modification 12(1):47–81.
White, S.W.
    2000     Elder abuse: Critical care nurse role in detection. Critical Care Nursing Quar-
             terly 23(2):20–25.
Wolf, R.
    2000     Risk Assessment Instruments. National Center on Elder Abuse Newsletter, Sep-
             tember.
Zubenko, G.S., and T. Sunderland
    2000     Geriatric psychopharmacology: Why does age matter? Harvard Review of Psy-
             chiatry 7(6):311–333.
                                           13

         Financial Abuse of the Elderly in
                Domestic Settings
                          Thomas L. Hafemeister*




                           I
                          n some ways financial abuse is very similar to other
forms of elder abuse in that it can be devastating to the victim and is
frequently traced to family members, trusted friends, and caregivers. But
unlike physical abuse and neglect, financial abuse is more likely to occur
with the tacit acknowledgment and consent of the elder person1 and can be
more difficult to detect and establish. As a result, financial abuse requires
a distinct analytical perspective and response. Unfortunately, these differ-
ences are often overlooked.
    Little empirical research has been conducted that directly addresses
financial abuse of the elderly, and in general it has received less attention
than other forms of elder abuse (Nerenberg, 2000b). Although the amount
of attention given to it has increased in recent years, most commentary rests



  *Thomas L. Hafemeister, J.D., Ph.D., is Director of Legal Studies at the Institute of Law,
Psychiatry, and Public Policy, University of Virginia. He is indebted to Lori Stiegel, Carla
VandeWeerd, and Richard Bonnie, who read and provided valuable comments on an earlier
draft of this report.
   1There is some controversy over whether this population should be referred to as elder
persons (the elderly) or as older persons (older people). This dispute tends to focus on
conflicting views regarding which terminology is the most descriptive and the least likely to
perpetuate inappropriate stereotypes. Resolving this dispute, however, is tangential to the
focus of this report. “Elder persons” and “the elderly” are used throughout this report
primarily because they are widely used terms and appear routinely in related legislation and
legislative hearings (see U.S. Congress, 2000).


                                            382
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                            383

on a relatively thin empirical base and draws heavily on anecdotal observa-
tions and relies (perhaps inappropriately) on research and analysis address-
ing other forms of elder abuse, child abuse, and spouse/partner abuse.
Because financial abuse is frequently addressed in conjunction with other
forms of elder abuse, a brief overview of elder abuse in general is provided
before turning specifically to financial abuse of the elderly.


              PREVALENCE OF ELDER ABUSE IN GENERAL
     Elder abuse, at least to some degree, has probably always existed. Only
in the past few decades, however, has it been recognized as a major societal
problem. Attention to elder abuse followed the “discovery” of child abuse
in the 1960s and spouse abuse in the 1970s. Today, elder abuse is widely
characterized as both a pervasive problem and a growing concern (Dessin,
2000; Heisler, 2000; Moskowitz, 1998b).
     The National Elder Abuse Incidence Study (NEAIS), which was de-
scribed as the first national study of the incidence of elder abuse in the
United States,2 estimated that nearly a half million persons aged 60 and
over in domestic settings were abused or neglected during 1996 (National
Center on Elder Abuse, 1998).3 Furthermore, this study determined that
for every reported incident of elder abuse or neglect, approximately five
incidents were unreported (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1998), sup-
porting a wide consensus that elder abuse is greatly underreported (Choi
and Mayer, 2000; Dessin, 2000; U.S. General Accounting Office, 1991;
Kleinschmidt, 1997; Moskowitz, 1998b; National Center on Elder Abuse,
1996). The NEAIS confirmed a general view that state agencies established
to receive such reports, such as Adult Protective Services (APS) agencies,
receive reports of the most visible and obvious occurrences of elder abuse,
but that there are many other incidents that are not reported. Nevertheless,


   2It should be noted that the methodology employed in the NEAIS study has been ques-
tioned (Comijs et al., 2000; Thomas, 2000). However, methodological limitations are associ-
ated with virtually all elder abuse research. The goal of this report is not to provide a
methodological critique of elder abuse research in general or financial abuse in particular. In
addition, regardless of any methodological limitations, the NEAIS study provides useful com-
parisons across categories of elder abuse. There is, however, a need for more rigorous
research on both elder abuse in general and financial abuse of the elderly in particular.
   3An earlier and frequently cited report from the House Select Committee on Aging sug-
gested that between 1 million and 2 million older Americans experience mistreatment each
year (U.S. Congress, 1991). Recent review articles have estimated the number of elderly
individuals victimized each year as 2 million (Moskowitz, 1998a), 1.5 million (Dessin, 2000),
1 million (Marshall et al., 2000), and 818,000 (Coker and Little, 1997). It has also been
estimated that 5 percent of elder persons suffer some form of abuse each year and that one
out of every four will experience abuse or neglect at some time (Dessin, 2000).
384                                                                 ELDER MISTREATMENT

the number of APS elder abuse reports substantially increased over the past
10 years, an increase that exceeded the growth in the elderly population
during this period (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1998).


                             FORMS OF ELDER ABUSE
     What constitutes elder abuse is defined by state law, and state defini-
tions vary considerably (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1991; Kapp, 1995;
National Center on Elder Abuse, 2001; Moskowitz, 1998b; Roby and
Sullivan, 2000).4 Not surprisingly, researchers have also used many differ-
ent definitions in studying the problem (Choi and Mayer, 2000;
Kleinschmidt, 1997; Macolini, 1995; National Center on Elder Abuse,
2001; Pillemer and Finkelhor, 1988).5 The variation in definitions has
been cited as a significant impediment to elder abuse recognition, manage-
ment, research, and analysis (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1991;
Kleinschmidt, 1997; Lachs and Pillemer, 1995; Moskowitz, 1998b;
Nerenberg, 2000a; Roby and Sullivan, 2000; Rosenblatt et al., 1996).
     Elder abuse in domestic settings (i.e., within the older person’s own
home or in the home of a caregiver) is often differentiated from elder abuse
within institutional settings (i.e., within residential facilities for older per-
sons such as nursing homes) (Brandl and Meuer, 2000; National Center on
Elder Abuse, 1996, 2001). Domestic elder abuse has been asserted to be
more prevalent than institutional elder abuse (Kosberg and Nahmiash,
1996; Marshall et al., 2000; Moskowitz, 1998b), in part because it has
been estimated that 80 percent of the dependent elders in this country are
cared for at home (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1996). However,
research directly substantiating this assertion is lacking.6 Another di-
chotomy frequently used distinguishes between elder abuse by individuals
who have a special relationship with the elder person (e.g., spouses, chil-
dren, other relatives, friends, or caregivers providing services within the



    4These variations include whether elder abuse is addressed as a separate category or whether
it is grouped with the abuse of adults with a disability of any age, the age cutoff used to define
an elder person, the definitions of various types of abuse, and whether elder abuse encom-
passes self-neglect or sexual abuse (Dessin, 2000; Lachs and Pillemer, 1995; Mehta, 2000).
    5The little research that has been conducted has been criticized for conceptual and method-
ological weaknesses, including reliance on underinclusive or nonrepresentative samples of
cases brought to the attention of social agencies or reporting authorities, unclear definitions
of elder abuse, reliance on professional reports rather than victim interviews, and failure to
use rigorous research designs, such as random-sample surveys and case-comparison studies
(Pillemer and Finkelhor, 1988; Schiamberg and Gans, 2000).
    6Data on institutional elder abuse are so scarce that it is not possible to make any national
estimates of its incidence or prevalence” (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1996:2).
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                          385

elder person’s home) and individuals with whom such a preexisting special
relationship does not exist (Kosberg and Nahmiash, 1996; Marshall et al.,
2000; National Center on Elder Abuse, 1996, 2001).7 Within domestic
settings, it has been reported that the perpetrators of elder abuse are much
more likely to be family members (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1996).
     Although conceptualizations of what elder abuse encompasses vary
considerably, the National Center on Elder Abuse (2001) identifies six
major categories of elder abuse. They include physical abuse, sexual abuse,
emotional or psychological abuse, neglect, abandonment, and financial
abuse. Among these categories, financial abuse has received limited atten-
tion and is often not assessed in studies of elder abuse (Choi et al., 1999;
Kleinschmidt, 1997; Tueth, 2000). Nonetheless, financial abuse is increas-
ingly viewed as both sufficiently important to necessitate its inclusion in
studies of elder abuse in general and sufficiently distinct to justify address-
ing it separately (Choi and Mayer, 2000).

       PARAMETERS OF FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY
     The remainder of this report focuses on financial abuse of the elderly
within a domestic setting by individuals relatively well known to the elder
person. This focus encompasses financial abuse by family members, friends,
and caregivers of the elder person and excludes financial abuse within
institutional settings or by strangers. Domestic settings are not only a
frequent setting for this abuse,8 but their tendency to involve complex fam-
ily dynamics and deep-seated conflicts tends to make them particularly
challenging. Although financial abuse of the elderly within institutional
settings (e.g., within nursing homes) and by strangers (e.g., in the course of
consumer fraud) are serious concerns in their own right and in need of
systematic study (of which little has been generated to date),9 they are not
the foci of this report.
     To address financial abuse of the elderly, its parameters should first be
defined. Variously referred to as financial mistreatment; exploitation; or
fiduciary, economic, or material abuse, this type of abuse encompasses a




  7The latter would encompass most incidents of consumer fraud.
  8About 80 percent of the estimated 6 million dependent elders in this country are cared for
at home” (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1996:11–12). Furthermore, although little re-
search has been conducted on financial abuse within institutional settings, recent studies
identifying the top 10 deficiencies in long-term care facilities identified physical abuse or
neglect more frequently than financial abuse (Menio and Keller, 2000).
   9For a discussion of consumer fraud perpetrated on the elderly, see Deem (2000), McGhee
(1983), Smith (1999), and U.S. Congress (2000).
386                                                      ELDER MISTREATMENT

broad range of conduct (National Committee for the Prevention of Elder
Abuse, 2001). There have been widespread complaints that financial abuse
of the elderly is poorly defined, in part because it is hard to define, which
makes it difficult to identify, investigate, and prosecute (Dessin, 2000;
Langan and Means, 1996; Marshall et al., 2000; Roby and Sullivan, 2000;
Sanchez, 1996; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996). The absence of a uniform
definition perhaps explains why it is often not included or is poorly ad-
dressed in research on elder abuse in general (Langan and Means, 1996).
     Because elder abuse, like other domestic ills, has generally been consid-
ered a state concern rather than a federal concern, the absence of federal
law pertaining to elder abuse has placed on the states the responsibility to
define this activity. Forty-eight states and the District of Columbia are
reported to specifically mention financial abuse in their elder abuse statutes
(Roby and Sullivan, 2000; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996).10 States’ defini-
tions, however, vary widely on what constitutes financial abuse and who
can be held accountable for it (Roby and Sullivan, 2000; Sanchez, 1996).
     One complicating factor is variations in the class of individuals targeted
for protection from financial abuse. Three general approaches are em-
ployed. In some states all individuals who have reached a given age are
specifically protected, in other states protection is provided to all vulnerable
or incapacitated adults regardless of age, and a third group of states uses a
hybrid approach that protects vulnerable or incapacitated adults of any age
and all adults over a certain age (Dessin, 2000; Roby and Sullivan, 2000).
The last two approaches can make it difficult for researchers to distinguish
reports of elder abuse from reports of adults in general (Coker and Little,
1997). The first approach, however, has been criticized for perpetuating
the unfounded stereotype that all elderly persons are vulnerable and in need
of protection (Roby and Sullivan, 2000). Also, some states require dimin-
ished decision-making capacity by the elder person before financial abuse is
considered to occur, while other states do not impose such a requirement
(Tueth, 2000). States even vary on the age when someone becomes “eld-
erly” (Coker and Little, 1997; Paveza, 2001).
     Other variations in state definitions are associated with who can be
held accountable for financial abuse. Some states require dishonest tactics
by perpetrators, such as the use of force, duress, misrepresentation, undue
influence, or other illegal means, to take advantage of the elder person.
Other states do not require a showing of such tactics if the perpetrator
knew or should have known that the elder person lacked the cognitive




  10As of 1995, New York and Oregon were purported to be silent on financial abuse
(Wilber and Reynolds, 1996).
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                             387

capacity to make financial decisions (Tueth, 2000). Similarly, some states
limit financial abuse to an intentional improper use of the elder’s resources,
while other states encompass negligent, or at least reckless, advice or con-
duct, such as failing to use income effectively for the care of the older
person (Dessin, 2000; Roby and Sullivan, 2000).
     Generally the victim must experience some disadvantage as a result of
the transaction, but some states also require that the perpetrator gain some
advantage from the transaction (Dessin, 2000). The latter would not penal-
ize actions that merely wasted the elder person’s assets (Dessin, 2000).
States also vary on whether abuse is limited to the abuse of the elder
person’s money and real property or also encompasses other resources such
as the elder person’s goods and services (Roby and Sullivan, 2000). Finally,
some states limit financial abuse to those in a “position of trust” to an elder
person (Roby and Sullivan, 2000).
     It is widely recognized that it is difficult, even for experienced profes-
sionals, to distinguish an unwise but legitimate financial transaction from
an exploitative transaction resulting from undue influence, duress, fraud, or
a lack of informed consent (Tom, 2001).11 The seasoned professional can
also be tested by the complex and varied nature of these transactions
(Dessin, 2000). It may also be difficult to distinguish abusive conduct from
well-intentioned but poor, confused, or misinformed advice and direction
(Dessin, 2000; Langan and Means, 1996). Evaluating whether financial
abuse has occurred has been characterized as a complex and often subjec-
tive determination (Bernatz et al., 2001).
     Further complicating efforts to establish the parameters of financial
abuse of the elderly are that both the elder person and the perpetrator may
feel that the perpetrator has some entitlement to the elder person’s assets
(Dessin, 2000). Elder persons may feel a desire to benefit their heirs or to
compensate those who provide them with care, affection, or attention
(Dessin, 2000; Langan and Means, 1996). It can be difficult to discern a
transfer of assets made with consent from an abusive transfer (Dessin,
2000; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996).
     Also, conduct that began in the elder person’s best interests may be-
come abusive over time, as when perpetrators initially provide helpful ad-
vice regarding financial investments but take on greater control and ulti-



   11Wilber and Reynolds (1996) provide a framework for distinguishing financial abuse of
the elderly from acceptable exchanges, while Tueth (2000) identifies transactions needing
careful scrutiny before concluding that financial exploitation has occurred. Roby and Sullivan
(2000) argue that definitions of financial abuse should be broad enough to provide sufficient
flexibility to address the range of financial abuse and offenders, yet specific enough to protect
individuals acting in the best interests of the elder person.
388                                                                ELDER MISTREATMENT

mately misappropriate funds for themselves as the elder person’s cognitive
abilities decline (Dessin, 2000). Typically, financial abuse in a domestic
setting reflects a pattern of behavior rather than a single event and occurs
over a lengthy period of time (National Clearinghouse on Family Violence,
2001; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996). Determining when financial abuse
began can be very difficult (Smith, 1999).
     Finally, a number of commentators have asserted that whether finan-
cial abuse is considered to have occurred should reflect the elder person’s
perception of the purported abuse and the cultural context in which it takes
place (Moon, 2000; Nerenberg, 2000a; Sanchez, 1996; Wolf, 2000; see
generally Tatara, 1999). For example, attitudes about the legitimacy of a
transfer may reflect expectations within a given culture that elderly persons
will share their resources with family members in need, while other cultures
reject this notion (Brown, 1999; Moon, 2000; Nerenberg, 2000a). Studies
have shown considerable variation in what constitutes financial abuse across
cultural, racial, and ethnic groups (Brown, 1999; Hudson and Carlson,
1999; Moon, 2000; Nerenberg, 2000a), and it has been argued that a
failure to take into account these differences undercuts efforts to assess
financial abuse of the elderly (Sanchez, 1996).12


             TYPES OF FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY
     In efforts to address financial abuse of the elderly, advocates for the
elderly often delineate typical examples of this abuse.13 Examples specifi-
cally relevant to a domestic setting and financial abuse by individuals rela-
tively well known to the elder person include:

    • taking, misusing, or using without knowledge or permission money
or property (Dessin, 2000; National Center on Elder Abuse, 2001; Na-
tional Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001; National Committee for
the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001);
    • forging or forcing an elder person’s signature (National Center on
Elder Abuse, 2001; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001;
National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001);
    • abusing joint signature authority on a bank account (Rush and
Lank, 2000);




   12At the same time, the law places considerable weight on the importance of establishing
requisite standards of behavior that are uniform, consistent, and predictable across groups of
individuals.
   13For a lengthy list of specific examples of financial exploitation, see U.S. Congress (1981).
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                            389

     • misusing ATMs or credit cards (New York State Department of
Law, 2000);
     • cashing an elder person’s checks without permission or authoriza-
tion (National Center on Elder Abuse, 2001);
     • misappropriating funds from a pension (New York State Depart-
ment of Law, 2000; Langan and Means, 1996);
     • getting an elder person to sign a deed, will, contract, or power of
attorney through deception, coercion, or undue influence (National Center
on Elder Abuse, 2001; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001;
National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001);
     • providing true but misleading information that influences the elder
person’s use or assignment of assets (Dessin, 2000);
     • persuading an impaired elder person to change a will or insurance
policy to alter who benefits from the will or policy (Central California
Legal Services, 2001; Frolik, 2001; Smith, 1999);
     • using a power of attorney, including a durable power of attorney,
for purposes beyond those for which it was originally executed (Hwang,
1996; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001; Thilges, 2000);
     • improperly using the authority provided by a conservatorship, trust,
etc. (National Center on Elder Abuse, 2001);
     • negligently mishandling assets, including misuse by a fiduciary or
caregiver (Dessin, 2000);
     • promising long-term or lifelong care in exchange for money or
property and not following through on the promise (National Committee
for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001);
     • overcharging for or not delivering caregiving services (Central Cali-
fornia Legal Services, 2001); and
     • denying elder persons access to their money or preventing them
from controlling their assets (National Clearinghouse on Family Violence,
2001; Smith, 1999).


        PREVALENCE AND IMPACT OF FINANCIAL ABUSE

               Prevalence of Financial Abuse of the Elderly
      The prevalence of financial abuse of the elderly (like elder abuse in
general) is difficult to estimate because there is no national reporting mecha-
nism to record and analyze it, cases often are not reported, definitions vary,
and it is difficult to detect (Coker and Little, 1997; Deem, 2000; National
Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001). However, the consensus is that
it is a significant problem (Dessin, 2000).
      The National Center for Elder Abuse found that financial abuse ac-
counted nationally for about 12 percent of all substantiated elder abuse
390                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

reports in 1993 and 1994 (National Center on Elder Abuse, 2000; Zimka,
1997). A subsequent more comprehensive study conducted by the same
entity found that 18.6 percent of the 115,110 substantiated elder abuse
reports submitted to APS agencies nationwide in 1996—which included
reports of self-neglect—and were reports of financial or material exploita-
tion (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1998). Excluding reports of self-
neglect, this exploitation appeared in 30.2 percent of the substantiated
reports. This represented the third largest category of reports, less than
neglect (48.7 percent) and emotional or psychological abuse (35.41 per-
cent), but more than physical abuse (25.6 percent).14 A national survey in
Canada found that financial abuse was the most common type of elder
abuse in that country (Podnieks, 1992).15
     Some parts of the country report an even greater prevalence of financial
abuse.16 Financial exploitation has been reported to be the most frequent
form of perpetrator-related elder abuse in Illinois (Neale et al., 1996) and
Oregon (U.S. Congress, 2000). It has been asserted that half of all abuse
cases in New York state include financial exploitation and that in New
York City 63 percent of abuse cases involve finances (New York State
Department of Law, 2000). A study of APS reports in upstate New York
between 1992 and 1997 that led to state intervention found that financial
exploitation was present in 38.4 percent of the cases (Choi and Mayer,
2000). A study in Massachusetts found that almost one-half of the cases of
elder abuse serious enough to require reporting to a district attorney in-
volved financial exploitation (Dessin, 2000). A review of California reports
from 1987 found that fiduciary abuse was the most prevalent type of
exploitation and appeared in 41.5 percent of the cases, with the next most
prevalent type of exploitation being physical abuse, which appeared in 33.3
percent of the cases (County Welfare Directors Association, 1988). In their
review of older studies, Wilber and Reynolds (1996) determined that be-
tween 33 percent and 53 percent of an estimated 1 million elder abuse
victims experienced financial abuse.
     Financial abuse has also been reported to be greater among various
minority populations. For example, exploitation was found to be the most
commonly reported abuse in samples of Korean immigrant and black elders


   14More than one substantiated type of abuse could be reported for an incident. The study
did not, however, provide specific information about this overlap (e.g., how often financial
abuse occurred in conjunction with another form of elder abuse).
   15A British Columbia study is reported to have found that 8 percent of older adults had
been financially abused, with an average loss of $20,000 each (National Clearinghouse on
Family Violence, 2001).
   16The variation in rates among states may be attributed in part to differing definitions and
assessments of financial abuse (Lavrisha, 1997).
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                     391

(Hall, 1999; Moon, 1999). It has also been suggested that in general
financial abuse is particularly likely to be underreported (Coker and Little,
1997; Hwang, 1996; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996).
     It has been asserted that financial abuse often occurs in conjunction
with other forms of elder abuse (Choi et al., 1999; National Clearinghouse
on Family Violence, 2001; Paris et al., 1995), although research generally
does not establish how frequently this overlap occurs.17 In a study of one
county’s investigated APS reports of financial exploitation Choi et al. (1999)
found that caregiver neglect also occurred in 12.1 percent of the cases, self-
neglect in 6.1 percent, physical abuse in 5.1 percent, and psychological
abuse in 3.8 percent. In a later analysis, Choi and Mayer (2000) found that
33.7 percent of this county’s investigated reports involved financial exploi-
tation plus either neglect or abuse, while 37.6 percent involved only finan-
cial exploitation. However, in a Canadian national survey, only 19 percent
of victims were victims of more than one form of maltreatment, although it
was not reported how often financial abuse occurred in conjunction with
other forms of elder abuse (Podnieks, 1992).
     Financial exploitation has been described as the fastest growing form of
elder abuse (New York State Department of Law, 2000), although empiri-
cal support for this assertion is scanty. Societal attention to elder abuse in
general is a relatively recent phenomenon, and attention to financial abuse
is even more nascent (Dessin, 2000). It has been suggested that an increase
in reports reflects closer scrutiny by federal, state, and local officials rather
than necessarily an increase in the prevalence of financial abuse (Lavrisha,
1997). Greater attention to this issue has been attributed to increases in the
number of elderly people, an increased emphasis on care at home, and the
substantial resources of the elderly (Langan and Means, 1996).


                The Impact of Financial Abuse on the Elderly
     One of the most frightening scenarios for an elder person is the possi-
bility of financial ruin (Dessin, 2000). Although not systematically as-
sessed, losing assets accumulated over a lifetime, often through hard work
and deprivation, can be devastating, with significant practical and psycho-
logical consequences (Dessin, 2000; Nerenberg, 2000c; Smith, 1999). Fi-
nancial abuse can have as significant an impact for an elder person as a
violent crime (Deem, 2000) or physical abuse (Dessin, 2000).
     Replacing lost assets is generally not a viable option for retired indi-


  17Elder abuse examples provided in governmental reports often show a combination of
financial abuse and physical or psychological abuse or neglect (County Welfare Directors
Association, 1988; U.S. Congress, 1981).
392                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

viduals or individuals with physical or mental disabilities (Coker and Little,
1997; Dessin, 2000; Moskowitz, 1998b; Nerenberg, 2000c). Also, because
of their age, the elderly will have less time to recoup their losses and often
are solely dependent on their savings to meet subsequent expenses and
needs (Smith, 1999). A depletion of assets is likely to result in a loss of
independence and security for the elder person (Choi et al., 1999;
Nerenberg, 2000c), which can have significant symbolic and practical rami-
fications. Such abuse may necessitate that the elder person become depen-
dent on family members, inducing or adding to their financial burden and
stress (Coker and Little, 1997). Alternatively, financial abuse may result in
elder persons becoming dependent on social welfare agencies, with a signifi-
cant decline in their quality of life (Coker and Little, 1997).
     From a psychological perspective, a loss of trust in others has been
identified as the most common consequence of financial abuse (Deem,
2000). In addition, victims may become very fearful, both of crime and of
their vulnerability to crime, which in turn may lead to dramatic changes in
lifestyle and emotional well-being (Fielo, 1987). Victims may also experi-
ence a loss of confidence in their own financial abilities, stress, and isolation
from family or friends (Deem, 2000). Financial abuse may lead to depres-
sion, hopelessness, or even suicide (Nerenberg, 2000c; Podnieks, 1992).
     In addition, it has been noted that, unlike physical and psychological
abuse, the effects of financial abuse may not end with the death of the
victim. Family members whose inheritance was reduced or depleted as a
result of the financial abuse will suffer loss and may themselves feel abused,
particularly if they felt entitled to inherit the victim’s assets (Dessin, 2000).


  WHY ELDER PERSONS ARE TARGETS FOR FINANCIAL ABUSE
     Although empirical support is often not provided, many reasons have
been identified for why the elderly are targeted for financial abuse. One set
of reasons addresses the financial assets and acumen of the elderly. For
example, one widely cited factor is that elder persons possess a large pro-
portion of the nation’s wealth (Central California Legal Services, 2001;
National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001), with 70
percent of all funds deposited in financial institutions controlled by persons
age 65 and older (Dessin, 2000). Other explanations have been that older
people may be more trusting than their younger counterparts (Central Cali-
fornia Legal Services, 2001) or may be relatively unsophisticated about
financial matters, particularly when they are unfamiliar with advances in
technology that have made managing finances more complicated (National
Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001). Also, they may not
realize the value of their assets—particularly homes that have appreciated
greatly in value (Central California Legal Services, 2001; National Com-
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                          393

mittee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001). It has also been suggested
that the difficulties of living on a fixed income may enhance their willing-
ness to try a “get-rich-quick” scheme (Dessin, 2000).
     Other reasons focus on characteristics of the elderly. One explanation
is that elder persons may be easily identifiable and are presumed vulnerable
(Central California Legal Services, 2001). In addition, elder persons may
be more likely to have conditions or disabilities that make them easy targets
for financial abuse, including forgetfulness or other cognitive impairments
(Central California Legal Services, 2001; Choi and Mayer, 2000). Elder
persons may also have a diminished capacity to rationally evaluate pro-
posed courses of action (Dessin, 2000).
     A third set of factors focuses on social isolation that the elderly may
experience (Quinn, 2000). For example, elder persons may be more likely
to have disabilities that make them dependent on others for help. These
“helpers” may have ready access to elder persons’ assets, documents, or
financial information or be able to exercise significant influence over the
elder person (National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001;
Nerenberg, 2000c; Quinn, 2000). In addition, seniors may be isolated due
to their lack of mobility or because they live alone, which shields perpetra-
tors from scrutiny and insulates victims from those who can help (Dessin,
2000; Nerenberg, 2000c). Also, the elderly may be lonely and desire com-
panionship and thus be susceptible to persons seeking to take advantage of
them (Hwang, 1996).
     A fourth group of reasons suggests that perpetrators assume that finan-
cial abuse of the elderly is unlikely to result in apprehension or repercus-
sions. Perpetrators may believe that elder persons are less likely to report
abuse or take action against perpetrators, particularly if they have been
victimized by family members or other trusted individuals (Central Califor-
nia Legal Services, 2001; Hwang, 1996; National Committee for the Pre-
vention of Elder Abuse, 2001). The elder person may be afraid or embar-
rassed to ask for help or be intimidated by the abuser (Hwang, 1996).
Perpetrators may also recognize that older people in very poor health may
not survive long enough to follow through on lengthy legal interventions
(Central California Legal Services, 2001; National Committee for the Pre-
vention of Elder Abuse, 2001) or that they will not make convincing wit-
nesses (National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001).


       RISK FACTORS AND CHARACTERISTICS OF VICTIMS
     A number of conditions or factors have been identified as increasing the
likelihood that an older person will be the victim of financial abuse in a
domestic setting. However, there has also been limited systematic research
on this issue.
394                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

     Older women who are white and live alone are considered to be the
most likely victims of this abuse, perhaps more so than for any other form
of elder abuse. The national NEAIS report found that 63 percent of the
APS reports from 1996 involved victims who were women, which was
somewhat more than their percentage of the elder population at that time
(57.6 percent) (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1998). However, when
relying on the reports of their sentinels, which were asserted to be more
comprehensive in scope and to include unreported incidents, the NEAIS
report concluded that 91.8 percent of the victims of financial abuse of the
elderly were women, the highest percentage for any form of elder abuse (the
next highest proportion was 83.2 percent for physical abuse) (National
Center on Elder Abuse, 1998). The NEAIS report also found that the
targets of financial abuse tended to be the oldest old, with 48 percent of the
substantiated APS reports and 25.3 percent of the sentinel reports involving
victims 80 years of age or older, even though they only comprised 19
percent of the total elderly population (National Center on Elder Abuse,
1998). Finally, the NEAIS report found that 83 percent of the substanti-
ated APS reports and 92.4 percent of the sentinel reports of financial abuse
involved white victims (whites comprised 84 percent of the national popu-
lation of elders in 1996) (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1998).
     Another report concluded from the scant amount of research available
and the authors’ analysis of cases from Alabama that more than 60 percent
of the victims of financial abuse of the elderly were likely to be elderly white
females over the age of 70 (Coker and Little, 1997). A study of APS
financial exploitation reports in an upstate New York county between
1989 and 1996 found that the elder victims were, on average, 78 years old,
68.7 percent of them were female, and 66.9 percent of them lived alone
(Choi et al., 1999). A Canadian national survey found that 62 percent of
elder victims of financial abuse were female, only 31 percent were married
(the lowest percentage of any category of elder abuse—51 percent of elderly
nonvictims were married), 54 percent were widowed, and 58 percent lived
alone (the highest percentage of any category of elder abuse, with only 39
percent of elderly nonvictims living alone) (Podnieks, 1992). The widely
cited profile of a target for financial abuse is generally a white woman over
75 who is living alone (Bernatz et al., 2001; Rush and Lank, 2000; Tueth,
2000).
     A number of reasons are given for why most elder victims of financial
abuse are women (Dessin, 2000). One is actuarial in nature; namely,
women live longer than men and thus more women are available as targets
for financial abuse of the elderly. Second, perpetrators may perceive women
as weak and vulnerable in general. Third, many women have not handled
their financial affairs because their husbands handled them. When their
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                             395

husbands die or lose the capacity to manage their finances, these women
make particularly good targets for perpetrators who offer “help” but in-
stead exploit available assets.
     Regardless of gender, a lack of familiarity with financial matters in
general or the means of conducting a particular financial transaction en-
hances the likelihood of financial abuse (Choi et al., 1999; Choi and Mayer,
2000; National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001).
Changes in and unfamiliarity with the means by which financial transac-
tions are conducted, including electronic transactions, add to this vulner-
ability. The risk of financial abuse may also be increased when the elder
person is uncomfortable speaking about financial issues (Rush and Lank,
2000). In general, elders who own a house, a substantial and visible asset,
are more likely to be exploited (Choi et al., 1999; Choi and Mayer, 2000).
     Other factors identified as increasing the likelihood of financial abuse
focus on the social status of the elder person. Identified risk factors include
an elder person’s social isolation, loneliness, and recent loss of loved ones
(Bernatz et al., 2001; Choi and Mayer, 2000; Hwang, 1996; National
Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001; Podnieks, 1992; Quinn,
2000; Tueth, 2000; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996). Having family members
who are unemployed or who have substance abuse problems have also been
identified as placing an elder person at greater risk of financial abuse (Na-
tional Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001). Similarly,
when a relative is the elder person’s only social support, the risk of financial
exploitation may be increased (Choi et al., 1999). Conversely, having
family members who are actively involved in good faith in assisting with or
managing the financial affairs of the elderly has been determined to dimin-
ish the risk that the elderly will experience financial abuse (Rush and Lank,
2000). However, a combination of denial of a need for such assistance,
busy lives, and a reluctance to confront difficult issues may keep many
family members from such involvement (Rush and Lank, 2000). It has also
been noted that little is known about the close bonds that develop naturally
between the elderly and their caregivers, particularly when services are
provided the elderly within their homes, and what leads to financial abuse
(Quinn, 2000).
     Physical or mental disabilities of elder persons have also been identified
as risk factors, including medical problems that limit their ability to under-
stand and comprehend financial issues and impairments that create depen-
dency on others (Bernatz et al., 2001; Choi et al., 1999; Giordano et al.,
1992; Hwang, 1996; National Committee for the Prevention of Elder
Abuse, 2001; Podnieks, 1992; Tueth, 2000; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996).
However, it has been argued that the extent to which older persons are
vulnerable to financial abuse is more directly related to the circumstances in
396                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

which they live than advanced age per se (Smith, 1999) and that age alone
should not lead to a presumption of incapacity (Wilber and Reynolds,
1996).


                        SIGNALS OF FINANCIAL ABUSE
     Relying primarily on anecdotal evidence, personal experience, or com-
monly shared beliefs, practitioners have compiled and circulated a number
of indicators that suggest when financial abuse of an elder person may be
occurring. These indicators have been distributed to bank employees, law-
yers, and the public in general. It is recommended that no single indicator
be taken as establishing the existence of financial abuse, as there may be
other explanations for the occurrence of the indicator; instead reliance is
placed on a pattern or cluster of indicators (National Committee for the
Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001). It has also been argued that it is almost
impossible to detect financial abuse without considerable knowledge of the
victim’s financial affairs (Dessin, 2000). It has been suggested that bank
tellers, personal bankers, officials responsible for registering deeds, family
members, and neighbors are the most likely to observe the signs of financial
abuse (Henningsen, 2001). The indicators can be grouped by the setting or
circumstances in which they are most likely to be observed.18
     For example, a number of indicators can be apparent during a visit to
the home or residence of the elder person. A relatively obvious indicator is
missing belongings or property (e.g., jewelry) (Hwang, 1996; National Cen-
ter on Elder Abuse, 2001; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence,
2001; National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001; Zimka,
1997). Financial abuse may be suggested by an absence of documentation
about financial arrangements or transactions (e.g., pensions, stock, govern-
ment payments, credit card charges) (Central California Legal Services,
2001; National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001). Im-
plausible or evasive explanations by the elder person or the caregiver about
the elder person’s finances, the elder person’s unawareness of or confusion
about recently completed financial transactions, or the elder person appear-
ing to be afraid or worried when talking about money may serve as indica-
tors (Carroll, 2001; Central California Legal Services, 2001; National Clear-
inghouse on Family Violence, 2001; National Committee for the Prevention
of Elder Abuse, 2001). Alternatively, unpaid bills, eviction or foreclosure




  18Wilber and Reynolds (1996) have developed a framework that organizes various indica-
tors of financial abuse in such a way as to assist professionals to distinguish legitimate from
illegitimate transactions.
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                          397

notices, or notices to discontinue utilities despite the availability of ad-
equate financial resources may suggest financial abuse (Carroll, 2001; Cen-
tral California Legal Services, 2001; National Center on Elder Abuse, 2001;
National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001; Zimka,
1997).
     Financial abuse may also be indicated by a lack of care or substandard
care, a decline in personal grooming, or an absence of clothing, food, or
other basic necessities when the older person can afford them (National
Center on Elder Abuse, 2001; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence,
2001; National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001; Zimka,
1997). Similarly, financial abuse may be suggested by complaints from the
elder person about once having had money but not seeming to have much
anymore (Carroll, 2001; Zimka, 1997) or a sudden inability to pay bills
(Langan and Means, 1996). Additional signals may be provided by an
unkempt residence when arrangements have been made for providing care
or a failure to receive services for which payment has already been made
(Central California Legal Services, 2001). Alternatively, the provision of
services that are not necessary may also indicate financial abuse (National
Center on Elder Abuse, 2001). Untreated medical or mental health prob-
lems may be an indication of financial abuse (Central California Legal
Services, 2001; Hwang, 1996). In general, significant cognitive impair-
ments suggest vulnerability to financial abuse (Choi et al., 1999; Choi and
Mayer, 2000; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996).
     Another widely cited indicator is social isolation of the elder person,
including a discontinuation of prior relationships with family and friends
(Central California Legal Services, 2001; Henningsen, 2001; National Clear-
inghouse on Family Violence, 2001; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996). In-
creased dependence on others, loneliness, loss of loved ones, and a reduced
sense of self-worth can indicate vulnerability to financial abuse (Wilber and
Reynolds, 1996). Relatedly, financial abuse may be suggested by new
acquaintances or “best friends,” particularly those who take up residence
with the older person, who the elder person relies on totally, or who express
overenthusiastic affection for the elder person (Carroll, 2001; Coker and
Little, 1997; Hwang, 1996; National Committee for the Prevention of
Elder Abuse, 2001). Financial abuse may be suggested by a noticeable
increase in the spending of people living with or caring for the older person
(Dessin, 2000; Henningsen, 2001) or by sudden heavy traffic in and out of
the home (Hwang, 1996). Another warning signal may be caregivers or
family members who express excessive interest in the amount of money
being spent on the older person, who ask only financial questions, or who
do not allow the elder person to speak (Carroll, 2001; Langan and Means,
1996; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001; National Com-
mittee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001; Tueth, 2000). Also a
398                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

promise of lifelong care may be accompanied by an implicit or explicit
expectation that the elder person’s funds will be transferred to the caregiver
(Hwang, 1996).
     Family members who are addicted to alcohol or drugs or who indicate
they feel entitled to the elder person’s funds may suggest financial abuse
(Hwang, 1996). Alternatively, a circle of mutual dependence or conflict
that engulfs family members may engender financial abuse or leave family
members blind to its possibility (Gold and Gwyther, 1989).
     A second setting in which indicators of financial abuse may arise is
associated with the conduct of banking transactions. For example, finan-
cial abuse may be suggested by withdrawals from or transfers between
bank accounts that the older person cannot explain, unusual or unex-
plained sudden activity, including large withdrawals (particularly when the
elder person is accompanied by another person), or frequent transfers or
ATM withdrawals (Coker and Little, 1997; Commonwealth of Massachu-
setts, 2001; Henningsen, 2001; Hwang, 1996; National Center on Elder
Abuse, 2001; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001; National
Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001). Other indicators
include having bank statements and canceled checks sent to an address that
is not the elder person’s residence, suspicious signatures on checks or other
documents, and the inclusion of additional names on an elder person’s
credit card or bank signature card (Coker and Little, 1997; National Center
on Elder Abuse, 2001; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001;
National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001; Zimka,
1997).
     Related indicators focus on deviations from the elder person’s usual
banking behavior (Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 2001; National Cen-
ter on Elder Abuse, 2001). They include suspicious activity on credit card
accounts; bank activity that is erratic, unusual, or uncharacteristic; and
bank activity inconsistent with the person’s abilities (e.g., ATM withdraw-
als by someone who is homebound) (Central California Legal Services,
2001; Coker and Little, 1997; Dessin, 2000; Zimka, 1997). Another indi-
cation is provided when individuals have no awareness of the current state
of their personal financial affairs (Rush and Lank, 2000). A signal may be
provided when checks uncharacteristically begin to lack adequate funds to
cover them, when the person is in debt and does not know why, when
mostly smaller checks increase to larger checks for a variety of items, or an
unusual number of checks are written to “cash” (Carroll, 2001; Dessin,
2000; Henningsen, 2001; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence,
2001).
     A third cluster of indicators is associated with legal transactions involv-
ing the elder person and is directed largely at attorneys. They include the
execution of legal documents or arrangements, such as powers of attorney,
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                              399

by an older person who is confused or who does not understand or remem-
ber the transaction (Carroll, 2001; Central California Legal Services, 2001;
Hwang, 1996; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001; National
Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001). Other signs are
suspicious or forged signatures on documents and changes in the older
person’s property, titles, will, or other documents, particularly if the changes
are unexpected, sudden, or favor new acquaintances (National Center on
Elder Abuse, 2001; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001;
National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001; Zimka,
1997). Another signal can be the sudden appearance of previously
uninvolved relatives claiming rights to an elder person’s affairs and posses-
sions (National Center on Elder Abuse, 2001).
     A fourth cluster of signals is associated with visits to physicians or
other health care providers. One such signal is a patient’s unmet physical
needs notwithstanding the availability of financial resources (Lachs and
Pillemer, 1995). Other identified behaviors are missed medical appoint-
ments, dropping out of treatment, uncharacteristic nonpayment for ser-
vices, declining physical and psychological health, defensiveness or hostility
by the caregiver during visits or on the phone, and an unwillingness by the
caregiver to leave the elder person alone during appointments (Tueth, 2000).


  MOTIVATIONS AND CHARACTERISTICS OF PERPETRATORS
    As is true of most aspects of financial abuse of the elderly, little research
has been conducted on the motivations and characteristics of its perpetra-
tors. Nevertheless, there has been considerable speculation about them by
professionals interested in reducing this abuse.
    One set of motivations widely identified tends to be associated with all
forms of elder abuse. Frequently cited motivations include the perpetrator’s
substance abuse, mental health, gambling, or financial problems (Dessin,
2000; National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001; Tueth,
2000). The perpetrator’s actions may be based on “learned violence” or be
modeled after the prior behavior of the elder person (Dessin, 2000). Where
the perpetrator is a primary caregiver, caregiver stress has been cited as a
cause of this abuse (Dessin, 2000).
    There are also a number of characteristics linked relatively uniquely to
financial abuse. For example, the perpetrator may stand to inherit assets
and feel justified in taking an advance or in exercising control over assets
that are perceived to be almost or rightfully the perpetrator’s own (Dessin,
2000; National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001). When
the perpetrator is an heir, he or she may conclude that preemptive steps are
necessary to prevent the inheritance from being exhausted in paying for
medical or other expenses (National Committee for the Prevention of Elder
400                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

Abuse, 2001). Alternatively, negative attitudes toward persons identified
as likely heirs may motivate the perpetrator to act to prevent them from
acquiring the elder person’s assets (National Committee for the Prevention
of Elder Abuse, 2001). Because of a prior negative relationship with the
elder person, the perpetrator may feel a sense of entitlement to these re-
sources as payback for prior exploitation or abuse (Dessin, 2000; National
Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse, 2001). The perpetrator may
be motivated by a sense that he or she should be reimbursed for having
carried a substantial care-giving burden for the elder person (Dessin, 2000).
The perpetrator may conclude that the elder person has more assets than
needed and the perpetrator has too few, and thus the perpetrator is entitled
to a share of the elder person’s assets (Quinn, 2000). Also, an intricate
relationship may exist between elders and their caregivers. Older people,
who may no longer place as great a value on their material possessions, may
give gifts as a means of maintaining a power balance in their relationship
with the caregiver. At the same time, the caregiver may indicate that such
gifts are necessary if the elder person wishes to retain the caregiver’s atten-
tion and assistance (Quinn, 2000).
     When such motivations are present, a perpetrator may read into an
elder person’s words or behavior consent to a conveyance that a more
objective perspective would not. The recipient of a gift may argue that the
elder person provided implicit or explicit indications that the individual be
given certain assets. When consent to a transfer of assets has been clearly
provided and is not induced by fraud, duress, or undue influence, many
assets can be transferred on a relatively informal basis.19 Because of the
informal and private setting in which such transfers were purportedly made,
the transfers may be the subject of good faith disputes but not represent
financial abuse. However, individuals with the motivations described above
may report consent to a transfer by an elder person that was not given or
was not clearly provided, or attempt to induce this consent by fraud, du-
ress, or undue influence.
     Nonrelative perpetrators have been found to include career criminals in
the business of defrauding others in general and elders in particular, while
others were overcome by greed under the circumstances (Choi et al., 1999).
It has been observed that many exconvicts become paid caregivers for
vulnerable individuals, a practice that goes unchecked because most states
do not require criminal background checks and do not prohibit persons
convicted of certain crimes from working with the elderly (Nerenberg,
2000c).


  19Certain assets, including real property, require more formal means of conveyance such as
written documentation of the transfer in ownership.
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                           401

     As for the characteristics of the perpetrators, the NEAIS report con-
cluded that the relative youth of perpetrators of financial abuse was par-
ticularly striking compared to other types of abuse (National Center on
Elder Abuse, 1998). This study found 45.1 percent of the perpetrators were
age 40 or younger (versus 27.4 percent for all forms of elder abuse) and
another 39.5 percent were 41 to 59 years of age. It also found 59 percent
of the perpetrators were male (versus 52.5 percent for all forms of elder
abuse).
     In addition, people who financially abuse the elderly are often family
members, particularly adult children and grandchildren (National Center
on Elder Abuse, 1996; Quinn, 2000; Rush and Lank, 2000; Sklar, 2000).
The NEAIS report found that 60.4 percent of the substantiated 1996 APS
financial abuse cases involved an adult child (versus 47.3 percent for all
forms of elder abuse) and only 4.9 percent involved a spouse (versus 19.3
percent for all forms of elder abuse). In addition, it has been asserted that
“crimes [by the elders’ offspring] go undetected or are discovered long after
the assets have been depleted” (Sklar, 2000:21).
     A study of one county’s APS reports of financial exploitation found
that roughly 40 percent of the perpetrators were the victim’s sons or daugh-
ters, 20 percent were other relatives (only 1.5 percent were spouses), and 4
percent were not relatives (Choi et al., 1999). A related study found that
spouses were perpetrators of financial exploitation in only 1.5 percent of
cases as opposed to 13.8 percent of all other elder abuse cases (Choi and
Mayer, 2000). This study also found, however, that nonrelatives were the
perpetrators in 38.8 percent of the financial exploitation cases in contrast
to only 14.7 percent of all other elder abuse cases (Choi and Mayer, 2000).
Another report concluded that perpetrators are often relatives, particularly
children or grandchildren of the victim, many of whom depend on the
elderly victim for housing or other assistance, have substance abuse prob-
lems, and are represented almost equally by both genders (Coker and Little,
1997).
     Tueth (2000) constructed from the literature two types of perpetrators
of elder exploitation. The first type consisted of dysfunctional individuals
with low self-esteem who may be abusing substances, psychosocially
stressed, or suffering from caregiver burden. Such individuals will not seek
out victims but instead passively take advantage of opportunities that
present themselves. The second, more aggressive type methodically identi-
fies victims, establishes power and control over them, and obtains the
elder’s assets by using deceit, intimidation, and other forms of psychologi-
cal abuse. Such individuals may have an antisocial personality disorder and
have little regard for the rights of others. In a typical sequence, the victim
is identified as impaired and vulnerable; the victim’s trust is secured by
being friendly, helpful, and providing assistance; the victim is made passive
402                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

and comfortable and then isolated; and finally the perpetrator takes posses-
sion of assets by employing psychological abuse.


      APPROPRIATENESS OF ADOPTING MODELS ADDRESSING
                  CHILD AND SPOUSE ABUSE
    Societal attention to child abuse and spouse abuse20 predated the atten-
tion given to elder abuse. The rising awareness of child abuse in the 1960s
and that of spouse abuse in the 1970s have been cited as triggering societal
awareness of the existence of elder abuse (Dessin, 2000).21
    Preventive measures, reporting systems, and interventions designed to
curtail child abuse frequently provided a model for efforts to address elder
abuse (Capezuti et al., 1997; Gilbert, 1986; Kapp, 1995; Macolini, 1995;
Nerenberg, 2000a; Wolf, 2000). As statutes were already in place that
mandated child abuse reports and established service systems to redress
such abuse when elder abuse was “discovered,” many states found it expe-
dient to apply the same model to elder abuse as well (Anetzberger, 2000).
One reason for using the same model is that child and elder abuse, whether
physical or financial in nature, are difficult to detect because the victim may
be reluctant or unable to report the abuse (Dessin, 2000), in part because
the perpetrator is likely to be a family member (National Center on Elder
Abuse, 1996). Also, the victims of both forms of abuse are frequently
perceived as particularly vulnerable or sympathetic and in need of society’s




   20The phrase “spouse abuse” also encompasses actions associated with wife assault, part-
ner abuse, battered women, and domestic violence; is intended to refer to abuse between
adults who live together in intimate relationships, regardless of their marital relationship and
the gender of the partners; and remains the terminology used in a number of reporting
statutes.
   21Growing awareness of child abuse and the need for society to take steps to curtail it also
led to increased efforts to address spouse abuse. Initially it was suggested that there were
relatively direct parallels between child and spouse abuse in that in both the victims were
relatively helpless captives of the abuser (a relationship sometimes suggested for elder abuse
victims). Such a perspective led to legislation that mandates reporting by various individuals
of suspected spouse abuse. However, this “infantilizing” of spouses has met considerable
resistance. For example, the American Medical Association’s Council on Ethical and Judicial
Affairs asserted that spouse abuse differs from child abuse in important respects and con-
cluded that mandatory reporting of spouse abuse violated the ethical standards of confidenti-
ality that physicians owe to their adult patients (Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs,
AMA, 1992). Rather than imposing mandatory reporting of spouse abuse, a number of other
mandatory steps pertaining to spouse abuse have been suggested for treating physicians,
including mandatory intensive domestic violence training for various specialties as part of
medical education and requiring treatment plans and protocols that assist the medical team in
identifying and responding to abuse (Council, 1992; Jecker, 1993).
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                           403

protection (Wolf, 2000; Anetzberger, 2000). Nevertheless, although a state
may achieve a certain degree of efficiency when it builds on existing models
and service delivery systems, as will be discussed, important distinctions
caution against a whole-scale adoption of a child abuse model (AARP,
1993; Anetzberger, 2000; Brandl, 2000; Kapp, 1995; Kleinschmidt, 1997;
Macolini, 1995; Vinton, 1991; Wolf, 2000), particularly when addressing
the financial abuse of the elderly.
    Alternatively, some commentators argue that a spouse abuse model is
better suited for crafting responses to elder abuse (Macolini, 1995; Pillemer
and Finkelhor, 1988). However, as will also be noted, financial abuse of
the elderly may represent a sufficiently distinct form of abuse that caution
should likewise be exercised before applying a spouse abuse model to ad-
dress it (Kleinschmidt, 1997).


                              Means of Detecting Abuse
    Because of compulsory education, children of school age interact with
people outside their home on a routine basis. Even younger children may
regularly attend preschool or day care. These contacts result in individuals
outside the home frequently being aware of a child’s health and well-being
and being in a position to detect and report abuse. For many elder persons,
such outside contacts may be sporadic and infrequent, which in turn re-
duces the likelihood that elder abuse will be detected and reported. Indeed,
an abuser of an older person may intentionally discourage or limit such
contacts to diminish the likelihood of detection. Thus, unlike child abuse,
a naturally occurring circle of individuals may not exist who can be encour-
aged or required to watch for and report elder abuse (Choi and Mayer,
2000; National Center on Elder Abuse, 1998).
    Also, child abuse models focus heavily on physical abuse. Financial
abuse is rarely an issue when a child is involved (Dessin, 2000).22 As noted,
financial abuse is a frequent concern when the elderly are involved. More-
over, the manner in which financial abuse occurs and its manifestations are
often very different from that of physical abuse. Rather than acting out of
rage or a loss of self-control, the perpetrator of financial abuse often acts in
a very calculated fashion specifically designed to avoid detection. Also,
physical abuse is more self-evident and more readily subject to proof than
financial abuse.


   22The closest analogy with regard to children would probably be the depletion of a child’s
potential inheritance by a parent. However, unless a trust or similar fiduciary account estab-
lished in the child’s name is being abused, parents are generally free to spend their assets,
wisely or unwisely, however they desire even if it results in their children not receiving an
inheritance from them.
404                                                                  ELDER MISTREATMENT

     In addition, the nature of the relationship between perpetrators of
financial abuse and their victims may create an expectation by third parties
that at least some financial resources will flow from the victim to the
perpetrator and this may obscure detection of abuse (Dessin, 2000). In-
deed, the perpetrator may feel entitled to the elder person’s assets and may
point to the elder person’s apparent tacit consent in attempting to establish
the legality of a transfer. Such consent is unlikely to be forthcoming or is
relatively easily dismissed as ineffectual when physical abuse is involved.
     In general, third parties may be more likely to respond to and report
instances of physical abuse than financial abuse. Within our society, vic-
tims of physical violence tend to receive greater attention, sympathy, and
support than victims of financial exploitation. For example, the victims’
rights movement, which in recent years has brought attention to the needs
of victims of violent crime, has not similarly focused attention on the plight
of victims of financial crimes (Nerenberg, 2000c). Also, children may elicit
more sympathy and protection than the elderly and thus reports of their
abuse may be more forthcoming.23 These factors suggest that models for
detecting and preventing financial abuse of the elderly may need to be more
proactive than models used to respond to child abuse.


            Decision-Making Capacity of Children and the Elderly
     Another reason for adopting a model for addressing financial abuse of
the elderly that is relatively distinct from that used to respond to child abuse
is that issues associated with the decision-making capacity of the elderly are
quite different from those associated with children (Nerenberg, 2000a).
Unlike children, elder persons at some point generally possessed the capac-
ity to handle their financial affairs and exercised control over these affairs.
All adults are presumed to possess this capacity unless shown otherwise in
a legal proceeding. Until an elder person is determined to lack decision-
making capacity, the elder person has the right to make what may seem to
be poor or foolish financial decisions (Gilbert, 1986; Macolini, 1995; Wilber
and Reynolds, 1996).24 In addition, to strip or limit the ability of elder
persons to make such decisions can be psychologically devastating as it may
represent for them the removal of the last vestige of independence and
emphasize their physical and mental decline, which in turn may accelerate
this decline (Dessin, 2000). As a result, many elder persons will actively



   23It has been argued that 1 of 3 cases of child abuse is reported compared to 1 in 5 or 1 in
15 cases of elder abuse (Rosenblatt et al., 1996).
   24As will be discussed below, an elder person, like all persons, is entitled to legal protection
if a financial decision is the result of fraud or undue influence.
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                             405

resent and resist any steps to limit their financial independence (Macolini,
1995). For example, in Massachusetts approximately one-fifth of the elder
persons for whom a report of abuse was filed refused a resulting offer of
state services (Dessin, 2000).25 It should be noted that such reports are
typically limited to relatively egregious incidents. Such data may suggest
that intervention to address the financial abuse of the elderly should be
limited to when there is fraud, duress, or undue influence or a clear lack of
capacity to make an informed decision (Dessin, 2000).26 At a minimum,
any model to prevent or remedy financial abuse of the elderly needs to take
into account the fact that elderly victims are adults who in general previ-
ously had complete autonomy over their financial transactions (Dessin,
2000).27 In particular, any such model needs to address whether and how
to proceed when the elder person denies a need for assistance or resents or
resists intervention (Capezuti et al., 1997).
     Second, determining when an elderly person lacks decision-making ca-
pacity can be a difficult matter. Even if an elderly person intermittently
experiences diminished capacity, he or she may in general retain decision-
making capacity. Decision-making capacity among children is quite clearly,
even if somewhat arbitrarily, demarked by the age of majority.28 For elder
adults, decision-making capacity tends not to be an all-or-nothing concept.
An individual with a cognitive impairment may have the capacity to make
some decisions but lack capacity to make others. Also, this capacity may
vary over time, with individuals having good days and bad days (Dessin,



   25Macolini (1995) reported that 6 states and the District of Columbia require the consent
of the elder person before commencing an investigation of a report of elder abuse and that 29
states and the District of Columbia specifically require the consent of the elder person before
services can be provided. See also Shiferaw et al. (1994); in cases in which allegations of elder
abuse were substantiated on investigation by APS staff and clients were offered protective
services, 13 percent of the victims refused such services; Gilbert (1986); perhaps 40 percent of
the older adults who health care professionals believed were abused refused intervention and
services.
   26Such refusals are honored in Massachusetts unless there appears to be coercion or a lack
of capacity to make an informed consent (Dessin, 2000). Some may argue (although not
without vigorous opposition) that physical abuse or neglect poses a more immediate threat to
the well-being of the elderly and thus necessitates a more proactive model akin to that used
for child abuse.
   27For example, even if the cognitive capacity of elder persons has become limited, their
personal involvement in these transactions may provide a valuable source of information that
should not be ignored.
   28There are certain circumstances defined by state law when a child who has not reached
the age of majority is considered emancipated and is therefore considered to have capacity to
make decisions on his or her own behalf. In addition, a few states have recognized a mature
minor doctrine.
406                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

2000; Langan and Means, 1996).29 Also, the diminishment of decision-
making capacity is often a gradual process. Determining when individuals
no longer have the capacity to make financial decisions for themselves is
often difficult (Nerenberg, 2000a).
     The American legal system places great weight on the right of individu-
als to make decisions for themselves, whether they be good or bad deci-
sions, and limits when someone who has experienced a diminishment of
decision-making capacity can have these rights curtailed. Furthermore, the
definitions and elements of decision-making capacity tend to vary consider-
ably (Nerenberg, 2000c). A general consensus has developed that an evalu-
ation of incapacity should be based on an appraisal of the functional limi-
tations of the person. However, what comprises a functional limitation and
what this appraisal should be based on is frequently poorly articulated and
inconsistently applied.30
     In addition, a wholesale adoption of a child abuse model can contribute
to the infantalization of the elderly and the perpetuation of ageism as the
elderly are mistakenly assumed to be like children and to lack decision-
making capacity (Capezuti et al., 1997; Gordon, 1986; Kapp, 1995;
Macolini, 1995; Nerenberg, 2000a; Tueth, 2000). Physical decline does
not necessarily correspond to significant mental decline and there is no
evidence that advanced years or physical disability alone render a person
incapable of making decisions (Gilbert, 1986; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996).
Many, if not most, elderly individuals retain their capacity to make finan-
cial decisions for themselves (Dessin, 2000). It has been noted that profes-
sionals, especially nonhealth ones, often jump to the wrong conclusion that
elderly people have dementia or otherwise lack decision-making capacity
(Langan and Means, 1996). Elder persons may justifiably resent the impo-
sition of a paternalistic model that appears to presume their lack of capac-
ity, imposes supervision of their decisions, and seeks to make financial
decisions on their behalf or delegate their decision-making authority to
others (Kapp, 1995).




  29Medication levels alone may induce a significant fluctuation in an individual’s decision-
making capacity.
   30This evaluation includes an appraisal of the individual’s ability to provide for his or her
financial needs, to understand the issues being addressed, to communicate about these issues,
to obtain needed financial assistance, to participate in the decisions being made, to under-
stand the ramifications of these decisions, and to provide ongoing oversight of them. See,
e.g., Dessin (2000); “The Uniform Probate Code focuses on the ability to make choices by
defining incompetence as ‘lacking sufficient understanding or capacity to make or communi-
cate responsible decisions.’”
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                              407

              Impact of Differences Between Child Abuse and
                      Financial Abuse of the Elderly
     As a result of the differences between child abuse and financial abuse of
the elderly, models for redressing financial abuse of the elderly may need to
adopt a different approach from that used in child abuse models. In light of
the scarce amount of research on the topic, it is difficult to determine how
a child abuse model might be usefully applied to the financial abuse of the
elderly. If financial abuse of the elderly is more difficult to detect than child
abuse, financial abuse of the elderly could necessitate a model that is more
proactive in detecting and responding to instances of such abuse. Similarly,
if research indicates that large numbers of egregious incidents of elder
financial abuse go unreported or unaddressed under a child abuse model,
more expansive measures than established under a child abuse model may
be necessary to enhance the filing of financial abuse reports and their
subsequent investigation.
     On the other hand, if research shows that victims of financial abuse
find reports and subsequent interventions to be relatively invasive and re-
pugnant, the reporting and investigation of financial abuse may need to be
circumscribed more narrowly than is typical for child abuse. If research
shows that most elderly persons resist or resent intrusion into their financial
affairs, that most older persons have bona fide reasons for their resistance
or resentment, or that most reports are not subsequently confirmed, argu-
ably the criteria for reporting or undertaking an investigation of reported
abuse should be narrowed from that applied to reports of child abuse.
Under such circumstances, greater weight may need to be given to the
wishes of purported victims and their right to enter into or remain in what
appear to be abusive interactions (Dessin, 2000).
     As current research, albeit relatively scanty, tends to show support for
both of the above scenarios, a dichotomous model relatively unique to
financial abuse of the elderly may be needed. A paternalistic model (similar
to that used for child abuse) might be applied to elder persons for whom a
determination can be made that there is a lack of financial decision-making
capacity. However, a less paternalistic model would be used for those
elderly persons for whom such a determination cannot be made. For the
former, the parens patriae rationale associated with the child abuse model
is arguably more fitting, justifying vigorous efforts to monitor their vulner-
ability to financial abuse and to enhance the reporting and investigation of
potential abuse. For the latter, our legal system dictates that such individu-
als be presumed to know what is in their best interests. Even if a transfer of
resources seems unjustified or inequitable to a third party, reporting and
intervention would be limited to when there is an indication of fraud,
duress, undue influence, or the like. Of course, determining when an
408                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

individual lacks financial decision-making capacity can be a difficult matter
(unlike for children, where age provides a blunt but clear dividing line) and
additional research would be needed to establish how this can or should be
done on a routine basis. Nevertheless, there are elderly persons for whom
there is clearly a lack of financial decision-making capacity and for whom
the dichotomy can clearly be applied.


                   Applicability of the Spouse Abuse Model to
                         Financial Abuse of the Elderly
     A number of commentators have argued that financial abuse of the
elderly should be viewed as a form of domestic violence and that legislative
models targeting spouse abuse better address its dynamics and serve its
victims (AARP, 1993; Brandl, 2000; Brandl and Meuer, 2000; Heisler,
1991; Vinton, 1991, 1999; Vinton et al., 1997).31 For empirical support,
an elder abuse survey conducted by Pillemer and Finkelhor (1988) is prima-
rily and widely cited (see AARP, 1993; Vinton, 1991, 1999; Vinton et al.,
1997). Pillemer and Finkelhor (1988) asserted that their research on elder
abuse indicates that spouse abuse provides a better model for understand-
ing and addressing elder abuse than does child abuse.32 They argued that
a child abuse model has been widely, but inappropriately, employed in
responding to elder abuse because it was initially believed that elder abuse
is intergenerational in nature. They contested this assumption based on
their research findings that spouses were more likely to be perpetrators of
elder abuse than adult children of the victim (58 percent versus 24 percent,




   31The following discussion focuses on the applicability of a spouse abuse model to finan-
cial abuse of the elderly. A similar debate has focused on whether this model provides a
better fit for elder abuse in general. See AARP (1993); Brandl (2000); Brandl and Meuer
(2000); Heisler (1991); Nerenberg (2000a); Vinton (1991, 1999); and Wolf (2000). Al-
though the debate continues, a number of commentators have rejected sole reliance on both
caregiver stress (which is cited as providing a rationale for adopting the child abuse model)
and caregiver violence (which is cited as providing a rationale for adopting a spouse abuse
model) in favor of an approach that views elder abuse as encompassing a range of factors that
may or may not be present in any given case and that invokes different models depending on
the specific circumstances involved (Anetzberger, 2000; National Center on Elder Abuse,
1996; Nerenberg, 2000a; Ramsey-Klawsnik, 2000; Wolf, 2000).
   32Pillemer and Finkelhor (1988) argue that shifting from an underlying child abuse model
to a spouse abuse model would (1) better inform service providers about situations in which
elder abuse is likely to occur, (2) help educate elders that abuse by a spouse is inappropriate
and encourage them not to accept it, and (3) better shape services provided in response to
elder abuse along lines already provided to abused spouses, such as battered women’s shelters
and self-help groups.
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                            409

respectively) and that there was no statistically significant difference in the
seriousness of the abuse inflicted by these two groups of perpetrators.
      However, Pillemer and Finkelhor did not include financial abuse in
their definition of elder abuse. Thus, they did not examine its occurrence
and did not determine whether spouses or adult children of the victims were
more likely to be perpetrators of financial abuse. In contrast, as noted
above, the NEAIS report found that 45 percent of the perpetrators of
financial abuse were age 40 or younger and only 4.9 percent of the inci-
dents involved a spouse (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1998). In addi-
tion, Choi and Mayer (2000) found that spouses were the perpetrators of
financial exploitation in only 1.5 percent of all financial exploitation cases.
It has been widely asserted that it is adult children and grandchildren of the
elderly that are particularly likely to perpetrate financial abuse (Coker and
Little, 1997; Quinn, 2000; Rush and Lank, 2000; Sklar, 2000).
      In addition, the underlying dynamic provided by Pillemer and Finkelhor
(1988) to explain the occurrence of the forms of elder abuse they studied
(physical abuse, psychological abuse, and neglect) further suggests that a
spouse abuse model may not be appropriate for addressing financial abuse
of the elderly. They argued that an elder person is most likely to be abused
by the individual with whom the elder person lives. They reasoned that the
higher proportion of elder abuse committed by spouses reflected the fact
that many more elders live with their spouses than with their children.
However, as discussed, a frequently identified precursor of financial abuse
of the elderly is their social isolation and, in particular, their living alone
(Hwang, 1996; National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse,
2001; Podnieks, 1992; Quinn, 2000; Rush and Lank, 2000). Victims of
financial abuse are more likely to be widowed and to report they have no
one to help them in the event of illness or disability, while victims of
physical violence tend both to be married and to be living with their abuser
(Choi et al., 1999; Podnieks, 1992). These findings further suggest that a
spouse abuse model may be inappropriate when developing responses to
financial abuse of the elderly.
      Finally, spouse abuse models have focused heavily on curbing physical
violence (Moskowitz, 1998b). Not surprisingly, these models center on the
physical injuries such violence is likely to produce and the need to promote
the safety of victims and means by which such injuries can be reduced
(Brandl, 2000; Council, 1992; Klingbeil and Boyd, 1984; Vinton, 1991).
The financial abuse of spouses has been a relatively minor concern. Al-
though some commentators assert that financial abuse of the elderly almost
always occurs in conjunction with physical abuse (Vinton, 1991), there is
little research that has addressed this issue and what there is suggests the
contrary (Podnieks, 1992). In general, the applicability of a spouse abuse
model has not been tested with older women (Nerenberg, 2000a) and the
410                                                            ELDER MISTREATMENT

“cycle of violence” that forms a foundation for the spouse abuse model
may have limited applicability to the financial abuse of the elderly.
     While a spouse abuse model may be appropriate when addressing the
physical abuse of the elderly, as well as a subset of financial abuse cases
when physical violence and financial abuse coexist, the spouse abuse model
(like the child abuse model) does not appear to provide a comprehensive
explanatory model for financial abuse of the elderly.33 A more eclectic
approach that focuses on the relatively unique aspects of financial abuse of
the elderly may be more appropriate. Among the specific factors that such
an approach might encompass are the intergenerational nature of this abuse
and tensions likely to occur across generations; the impact of financial
dependence on these tensions; whether and when physical abuse and vio-
lence tend to accompany financial abuse and their impact; the nature and
impact of more subtle forms of influence than violence; whether elder
victims of financial abuse perceive the perpetrators of this abuse differently
than perpetrators of physical abuse; and whether financial abuse is more
likely to reflect mismanagment, financial need, or greed rather than a desire
for power and control and the influence they exert on the manifestations of
financial abuse. At the same time, such a model (and accompanying re-
search) should also attend to the potential influence of factors typically
associated with spouse abuse models such as the impact of power and
control on financial abuse, victims’ incorporation of internalized messages
that they are to blame for this abuse, victims’ fear of retaliation if they
disclose their abuse, and social contexts that may lead an elder person to
fear disruption of the status quo (Vinton, 1999).


                             REPORTING STATUTES
    Forty-four states and the District of Columbia have enacted statutes
that mandate the reporting of elder abuse by certain individuals, with the
other states providing for the voluntary reporting of such abuse (Stiegel,
personal communication, October 2001).34 Although virtually all states
specifically mention financial abuse in their reporting statutes (Moskowitz,
1998b; Roby and Sullivan, 2000), they often do not establish special proce-
dures for the reporting and subsequent processing of reports of financial




   33Indeed, the American Medical Association’s Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs has
asserted that spouse abuse differs from elder abuse (and child abuse) in opposing mandatory
reporting of spouse abuse by physicians (Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs, 1992).
   34Reporting is voluntary in Colorado, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, South Da-
kota, and Wisconsin (Brandl and Meuer, 2000).
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                            411

abuse.35 States with mandatory reporting generally impose penalties, such
as fines, imprisonment, or license revocation, if reporting does not occur
within a specified time period following discovery of the abuse (Capezuti et
al., 1997; Kapp, 1995; Macolini, 1995; Marshall et al., 2000; Moskowitz,
1998b), although enforcement is generally lax (Heisler and Quinn, 1995;
Roby and Sullivan, 2000). According to Roby and Sullivan (2000), almost
half of these states have universal mandatory reporting, while the other
states limit mandatory reporting to specifically identified categories of pro-
fessionals. Reporting is frequently mandatory for certain professionals,
such as police officers, social workers, welfare and mental health workers,
nursing home employees, and licensed health care providers, and permis-
sive for all others (Dessin, 2000). In several states, certain professionals
who have a confidential relationship with the elder person (e.g., clergy,
physicians, lawyers, and therapists) are exempt from reporting, while other
states require reporting notwithstanding conflicting confidentiality rules
(Roby and Sullivan, 2000). The professionals mandated to provide reports
vary from state to state (Moskowitz, 1998b).36
     States typically provide good faith immunity for the reporter, regard-
less of whether abuse is confirmed and regardless of whether the reports
came from a mandatory or a voluntary reporter (Capezuti et al., 1997;
Moskowitz, 1998a; Roby and Sullivan, 2000). In most states, professionals
who report abuse are also protected by disclosure confidentiality laws that
prohibit the disclosure of the identity of the person who provided the report
without that person’s written consent (Marshall et al., 2000; Moskowitz,
1998a). States vary as to when a report is required, with most states having
a more stringent standard for individuals having contact with the elderly in
their professional capacity and a generic standard for everyone else (Roby
and Sullivan, 2000).
     Reports are generally directed to an agency authorized to initiate an
investigation, with this investigation to be started within a specified time
period (Moskowitz, 1998b; Roby and Sullivan, 2000). If the agency that
received the report is not a law enforcement agency, it will turn the matter
over to a criminal justice agency if it determines that a crime might have
been committed, although some states require that a competent victim give
permission to proceed (Henningsen, 2001; Roby and Sullivan, 2000). In



   35But see Wisconsin where investigations of reports of material financial abuse must begin
within five business days, while investigations of other forms of elder abuse must begin with
24 hours (Henningsen, 2001).
   36At least 20 types of professionals are listed as mandatory reporters in the various states,
including ambulance drivers, attorneys, bank personnel, chiropractors, clergy, and dentists
(Moskowitz, 1998b).
412                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

addition, typically an agency is empowered to coordinate the provision of
services for the elderly person determined to be at risk and to intervene to
protect endangered individuals (Moskowitz, 1998b).


                                   Sources of Reports
     Third parties, not the victims themselves, are the most likely to report
elder abuse in general (Choi and Mayer, 2000; Lavrisha, 1997; Moskowitz,
1998b; Tueth, 2000). The NEAIS review of substantiated APS reports in
1996 found that 25.7 percent of the reports came from hospitals, physi-
cians, nurses, and clinics, 20 percent came from family members, 14.8
percent came from in-home or out-of-home service providers, 11.3 percent
came from the police or sheriff, 9.1 percent came from friends or neighbors,
and only 8.8 percent came from the victims (National Center on Elder
Abuse, 1998). Most mandatory elder abuse reports appear to come from
health-care providers, including home health-care providers, and family,
friends, or neighbors of the victim (Rosenblatt et al., 1996; Wolf and
Pillemer, 1989).37
     For financial abuse, the NEAIS review found that the three most fre-
quent reporters were friends and neighbors (15 percent), hospitals (14.2
percent), and family members (14 percent). Choi et al. (1999) found that
two-thirds of the reports of suspected financial exploitation to an APS
agency were made by social service or health care providers and one-third
were made by other individuals, including relatives, friends, neighbors,
landlords, law enforcement agencies, and banks. Choi and Mayer (2000)
in a subsequent analysis determined that only 1.4 percent of the reports of
elder abuse came from the victims, a figure that did not significantly vary
when the focus was only financial exploitation cases.
     It has been claimed that health care providers, particularly practitioners
involved in the long-term care of the elderly, are in a unique position,
perhaps the best position, to detect the financial abuse of the elderly (Bernatz
et al., 2001; Hwang, 1996; Tueth, 2000). For example, it has been sug-
gested that such practitioners may have the best opportunity to meet pri-
vately with the elder person outside the presence of a caregiver; may be
asked for financial help or advice; may be likely to learn about an inability
to pay for important services such as medical care; may learn that patients



   37But compare Shiferaw et al. (1994); in a study of all reports of elder abuse over a three-
year period to a county APS unit in North Carolina, the most referrals came from service
agencies (32 percent), followed by family members (26 percent); Kleinschmidt (1997); “Physi-
cians infrequently report elder abuse, despite being ‘in an ideal position to recognize, manage,
and prevent elder mistreatment.’”
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                         413

have been forced to sign documents, provide loans or gifts, or sign docu-
ments they did not understand; may determine the elder person executed a
power of attorney when the person lacked the mental capacity to do so;
may notice suspicious companions and their relationship with the elder
person; or may detect neglect that reflects financial abuse (Bernatz et al.,
2001; Hwang, 1996; Lachs and Pillemer, 1995). It has been suggested that
health care providers affirmatively ask patients whether they are being
taken advantage of in any way (Bernatz et al., 2001; Lachs and Pillemer,
1995).
     It has also been asserted that adding financial institutions to the list of
mandatory reporters could “prove a valuable weapon against [financial]
abuse” (Coker and Little, 1997:4). Similarly, lawyers have been identified
as having a central role to play in identifying and preventing financial abuse
of the elderly (Moskowitz, 1998a).
     On the other hand, a report by the U.S. General Accounting Office
concluded that increasing public and professional awareness of the exist-
ence of elder abuse was more important in identifying cases of elder abuse
than reporting requirements and, although reporting laws are moderately
effective in case identification, these laws were not effective in preventing
first occurrences of elder abuse or treating substantiated cases (U.S. General
Accounting Office, 1991). The U.S. General Accounting Office concluded
that focusing the debate on the relative effectiveness of mandatory versus
voluntary reporting was of questionable value (U.S. General Accounting
Office, 1991). The U.S. General Accounting Office did not specifically
address financial abuse, but it did include “material or financial exploita-
tion” within its definition of elder abuse (U.S. General Accounting Office,
1991). In general, although not typically posed in the context of financial
abuse, controversy has raged over whether elder abuse should be subject to
mandatory reporting (Capezuti et al., 1997; Gilbert, 1986; Kapp, 1995;
Kleinschmidt, 1997; Macolini, 1995; Moskowitz, 1998b; Podnieks, 1992;
Roby and Sullivan, 2000).


                                Barriers to Reporting
     As discussed, there is a wide consensus that elder abuse in general is
greatly underreported (Coker and Little, 1997; Dessin, 2000; Marshall et
al., 2000; Moskowitz, 1998b; National Center on Elder Abuse, 1996, 1998;
Pillemer and Finkelhor, 1988; Wolf, 2000).38 Although little data are




  38But see Reis (2000), “It is also true that a seeming abuse is sometimes revealed as more
benevolent when examined closely” (p. 13).
414                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

available on this point, there seems to be a general view that financial abuse
of the elderly is perhaps even more likely to go unreported and thus unde-
tected (Hwang, 1996; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996). For example, although
it is frequently asserted that bank employees are particularly well posi-
tioned to detect financial abuse of the elderly (Coker and Little, 1997), a
survey of a small number of banks in New York City found that 43 percent
of the banks said they never reported financial abuse of the elderly to APS
and 14 percent reported it only sometimes (Heisler and Tewksbury, 1992).
     Reporting statutes rely on and are designed to encourage reports of
elder abuse. A number of reasons have been given for this underreporting.
     One potential source of reports is the victims themselves. As noted,
victims are relatively unlikely to report financial abuse (Choi and Mayer,
2000; Kleinschmidt, 1997; National Center on Elder Abuse, 1998;
Podnieks, 1992), reportedly more so than for other forms of elder abuse
(Podnieks, 1992). Not surprisingly, one set of reasons for underreporting
focuses on the characteristics of the victimized elder person. For example,
the elder person may be embarrassed at falling victim to financial exploita-
tion and may desire to avoid looking like a person who was too trusting
(Coker and Little, 1997; Dessin, 2000; Hwang, 1996; Nerenberg, 2000c;
Wilber and Reynolds, 1996). Similarly, elder persons may not want to
report the financial abuse for fear it will suggest that they are having
problems managing their affairs and provide a rationale for placement in a
nursing home or the institution of a guardianship (Hwang, 1996;
Nerenberg, 2000c). The elder person may also fear change and prefer the
status quo, regardless of its deleterious nature (Dessin, 2000).
     Elder persons may hold a view that some level of abuse is normal. For
example, they may have a self-identity that they are weak or undeserving or
a burden to others and thus may expect to be taken advantage of by others
(Dessin, 2000). Alternatively, they may have prior experience living in an
abusive environment where they witnessed abuse, were abused, or abused
others and thus do not consider it abnormal (Dessin, 2000).
     Because victims are often induced to cooperate in their own exploita-
tion, they may believe that they are fully or partially to blame for their
victimization (Nerenberg, 2000c). Alternatively, if the financial abuse has
an impact on other family members, elder persons may be blamed for or
feel responsible for the consequences (Deem, 2000). They may also be
concerned that they will become a burden to their family as a result (Hwang,
1996).
     The elder person may not realize that abuse occurred or that financial
abuse is a crime that can be reported (Coker and Little, 1997; Deem, 2000;
Wilber and Reynolds, 1996). Elder persons may also have an impairment
that prevents them from reporting the abuse or from recognizing its exist-
ence (Dessin, 2000; Gordon, 1986; Smith, 1999).
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                            415

     A second set of reasons traces underreporting to the nature of the
interaction between the victim and the perpetrator of financial abuse. A
widely cited reason is the reliance of the victim on the perpetrator for
support and care, a notion often planted and nurtured by the perpetrator,
and a fear of losing this support and care (Dessin, 2000; Smith, 1999). The
elder person may also fear the perpetrator, including a fear of retaliation
that is heightened the more abusive the relationship is (Deem, 2000; Gor-
don, 1986; Hwang, 1996; Smith, 1999). The elder person may be reluctant
to turn in a family member or someone with whom they feel a close bond
(Coker and Little, 1997; Dessin, 2000; Nerenberg, 2000c; Wilber and
Reynolds, 1996). Even if abusive, there may be a close personal relation-
ship between the victim and the perpetrator (Smith, 1999). The victim may
be unwilling to report financial abuse because it tends to be the result of a
relationship gone wrong or a betrayal of trust rather than outright theft
(Coker and Little, 1997; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996). Also, the elder
person may feel a sense of responsibility for the perpetrator’s actions, par-
ticularly in the case of a family member (Dessin, 2000).
     A third set of explanations for underreporting identifies barriers associ-
ated with the system designed to receive and respond to such reports. For
example, the elder person may be unaware of where to turn for help and
how to initiate a report (Deem, 2000; Dessin, 2000). Similarly, the elder
person may lack access to these channels, as when a perpetrator prevents
the victim from leaving a residence or using a telephone (Dessin, 2000). It
is also widely considered difficult for outsiders to detect financial abuse and
thus to discern a need for such a report (Choi et al., 1999; National Center
on Elder Abuse, 1998). Abuse may be relatively invisible to outsiders,
particularly as it may unfold slowly, involve elders who are socially iso-
lated, and not leave immediate, visible signs (Choi et al., 1999; Gordon,
1986).
     As discussed above, an alternative source of such reports are various
professional groups. However, the members of these groups have also been
slow to report financial abuse of the elderly (Hwang, 1996). A number of
explanations for this reluctance have been provided. For example, detect-
ing financial abuse can be difficult, particularly when interactions are brief
or where the individual does not have an expertise in financial affairs.
Moreover, professionals may resist reporting because of a fear of being
incorrect, because definitions are vague and ambiguous, or because of a
fear of liability for filing incorrect reports (Lachs and Pillemer, 1995;
Marshall et al., 2000; Sugg and Inui, 1992). Also, they may be unfamiliar
with the reporting system and the implications and impact of filing reports
(Lachs and Pillemer, 1995). Outsiders may not report financial abuse of
the elderly because of their fear of getting involved in the “opening of a
Pandora’s box” (Sugg and Inui, 1992) or because the victim denies abuse
416                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

occurred (Marshall et al., 2000). Finally, the perpetrator may prevent the
professional from spending time alone with the elder individual (Paris et al.,
1995).
     Health care providers are one professional group whose reluctance to
report financial abuse of the elderly has received considerable attention
(Kleinschmidt, 1997). Physicians have been found to be most likely to
report physical abuse and the least likely to report financial abuse
(Rosenblatt et al., 1996). Health care providers may fear that raising
concerns will offend or insult the patient, perhaps by impugning their finan-
cial competence, or invade the patient’s privacy (Marshall et al., 2000).
They may consider it an inappropriate topic for them to raise or believe that
it goes beyond the scope of the evaluation provided (Lachs and Pillemer,
1995; Marshall et al., 2000; Tueth, 2000). Also, they may cite their busy
schedules, particularly when it requires addressing a relatively complicated
topic in a short period of time, or their lack of expertise and the absence of
reliable standardized protocols for discerning whether finanancial abuse is
present (Marshall et al., 2000; Rosenblatt et al., 1996). Also, they may
believe financial abuse of the elderly occurs relatively infrequently among
their patients39 or that they are being asked to do too much already within
the relatively short time they meet with patients (Rosenblatt et al., 1996;
Sugg and Inui, 1992). Furthermore, it has been suggested that health care
providers do not report financial abuse because they are uncertain as to
where to make a report, believe it will not make a difference, or rationalize
away its existence (Beck and Phillips, 1984). Although, as noted, some
argue that health care professionals are well situated to detect and report
financial abuse (Lachs and Pillemer, 1995; Paris et al., 1995), others argue
that considering the many barriers faced, there are better ways by which
physicians can serve their patients (e.g., by recommending the establish-
ment of a guardianship or power-of-attorney when they identify that funds
are being misappropriated) (Tueth, 2000).


                                  Reliability of Reports
    At the same time, studies have indicated that a relatively high percent-
age of elder abuse reports in general and reports of financial abuse of the
elderly in particular are not substantiated following investigation (i.e., they


   39This may be the case for emergency rooms. Fulmer and colleagues (1992), in a six-
month study of the charts of elders seen in a hospital emergency department, found 3.4
percent of the patients suffered from neglect, 2.3 percent from abuse, 0.4 percent from violent
crime, 0.2 percent from abandonment, and only 0.05 percent from exploitation. Arguably,
however, this may be an unlikely setting for detecting financial abuse in elders and if relevant
questions were not asked such charts are unlikely to reflect its occurrence.
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                            417

are false positives).40 For example, the national NEAIS report found that
financial abuse reports to APS agencies were relatively unlikely to be sub-
stantiated (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1998). Only 44.5 percent of
these reports from 1996 were substantiated, as opposed to 61.9 percent of
physical abuse reports, 56 percent of abandonment reports, and 54.1 per-
cent of psychological abuse reports. Only neglect reports (41 percent) were
less likely to be substantiated.41
     There may be a discrepancy between how an elder person perceives an
act and how a third party, including a professional, perceives it (Shiferaw et
al., 1994). It has been suggested that individuals who report elder abuse
may be influenced by circumstantial evidence that is not confirmed on
investigation (Shiferaw et al., 1994). An elder person may consider a
financial conveyance to be a reward to someone for services rendered or
kindnesses provided, while an outsider may find the gift to be out of all
proportion to the nature of the service or kindness. Because professionals
are often assigned responsibility to report suspected instances of financial
abuse of the elderly, it is important that a professional’s classification of
behavior as abusive correlate at least to some degree with that of the older
person (Marshall et al., 2000). As discussed, elder persons often refuse to
cooperate with investigations triggered by reports of elder abuse or refuse
offered services (Dessin, 2000; Kleinschmidt, 1997; Gilbert, 1986; Shiferaw
et al., 1994), with one possible explanation being that they do not agree
that what occurred was abuse.42 Financial disputes, particularly among
family members, tend to involve complicated interactions in which there
may be conflicting perspectives on the appropriateness of the actions taken.
Professionals reporting elder abuse may fail to evaluate the elder person’s
situation adequately (Capezuti et al., 1997). Also, commentators have
argued that cultural differences may result in misperceptions of whether a
given financial transaction constituted abuse (Brown, 1999; Griffin, 1999;
Hall, 1999; Hudson and Carlson, 1999; Marshall et al., 2000; Moon,
2000; Nerenberg, 2000a; Sanchez, 1996; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996).43



   40In general, it has been argued that what seems to be elder abuse may be more benevolent
in nature on close examination (Reis, 2000).
   41Another study found that 76 percent of the reports of elder abuse referred to an APS unit
were not confirmed and, although the exploitation of resources was the most likely type of
abuse to be confirmed, only 46 percent of those reports were confirmed (Shiferaw et al.,
1994).
   42Other explanations provided, as discussed above, are shame or embarrassment over their
abuse, fear of reprisals by the perpetrator, reluctance to get a family member in trouble, guilt
for causing family tensions, or fear of institutionalization (Gilbert, 1986).
   43For example, cultural differences have been found to exist for Mexican-American, Ko-
rean-American, African-American, and Native American communities (Brown, 1999; Moon,
1999; Nerenberg, 1999a).
418                                                         ELDER MISTREATMENT

    When viewed in conjunction with the barriers discussed above that
limit the filing of such reports, it is likely that the elder abuse reporting
system results in both an overreporting (i.e., false positives) and
underreporting (i.e., false negatives) of financial abuse of the elderly.


              OTHER SYSTEMIC POST-ABUSE RESPONSES
    In part because of the many forms financial abuse of the elderly can
take, commentators have noted the difficulty of crafting a response system
that adequately redresses such abuse and deters its subsequent occurrence
(Dessin, 2000). Because there is no federal statute that deals directly with
financial abuse of the elderly, the issue has instead been addressed seriatim
by the various states. It is not surprising that legislative measures for
responding to financial abuse have often been criticized as piecemeal
(Dessin, 2000). There has also been little systematic evaluation of these
various measures and virtually no comparisons of their relative effective-
ness. As will be discussed, drawbacks and limitations for each of them have
been identified by commentators reviewing them. It has also been noted
that the legal system would likely be overwhelmed if it was seen as the
primary means of handling the financial affairs of even elder persons who
lack decision-making capacity (Langan and Means, 1996). Nevertheless,
most states have a range of measures available for responding to financial
abuse of the elderly and new measures are being instituted (Stiegel, 2000).

                          Administrative/APS Agencies
     All states have adopted some form of adult protective services law that
enables state agencies to offer remedies to victims of elder abuse (AARP,
2001) and each state generally has an APS agency designed to prevent and
address problems the elderly may face (Dessin, 2000).44 These agencies
focus on maintaining a system for receiving reports of mistreatment, inves-
tigating cases, and providing protection or assistance to the elder person
rather than punishing the perpetrator (Moskowitz, 1998b; Otto, 2000;
Roby and Sullivan, 2000). They generally can take steps to protect the
elder person from further abuse, including obtaining protective orders and
the initiation of a guardianship to place the assets of the elder person in the
hands of a guardian (Capezuti et al., 1997; Dessin, 2000).
     Advocates for the elderly complain that the federal government has
inappropriately reduced the financial assistance it gives the states to de-
velop and maintain protective services for the elderly and should be more

  44One exception is North Dakota, which has an APS law but does not have a functioning
APS program (Stiegel, personal communication, October 2001).
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                       419

actively involved (AARP, 2001; Moskowitz, 1998b; Otto, 2000). Also,
concerns have been raised about state failures to designate an agency with
primary responsibility for preventing, investigating, and responding to el-
der abuse and about the inadequate funding, staffing, and training of such
agencies (Capezuti et al., 1997; Dessin, 2000; Macolini, 1995).


                             Victims Services Network
     A number of commentators have noted the limited availability of the
victim services network for elderly victims of financial abuse and the lack of
resources made available to them. Because these services have historically
been targeted for victims of violent crime, it has been asserted that victims
of financial abuse are treated like “second class victims” in the victim
services network (Deem, 2000). In some states, restitution, case status
notification, and prison release information are available only to victims of
violent crimes (Deem, 2000). Similarly, it has been asserted that state social
service programs are generally underequipped to educate the elderly about
financial abuse prevention, to provide prevention services, to address the
emotional needs of financial abuse victims (e.g., by providing support
groups and counseling), to provide restitution advocacy or to help victims
recover their losses, to supply emergency funds, and to otherwise provide
needed services (Deem, 2000; Nerenberg, 2000c). Furthermore, there is a
lack of referral programs to assist victims to locate services designed to
assist them (Deem, 2000). Some states have fiduciary abuse specialist
teams (FASTs), which consist of an interdisciplinary group of representa-
tives from law enforcement, adult protective services, the office of the
public guardian, the prosecutor’s office, health and mental health provid-
ers, and expert financial and legal consultants to help victims recover or to
prevent further loss of their assets (Bernatz et al., 2001; Heisler, 2000).45
Of those programs that have been established to assist victims of financial
crimes, little systematic evaluation has been conducted of their availability,
impact, or effectiveness.
     Although Congress in 1984 created the Victims of Crime Act Fund
(VOCA) to assist crime victims, victim compensation funds provided
through state programs established under this legislation were until recently
available only to victims of violent crimes. In 2001, the Office for Victims
of Crime (OVC), United States Department of Justice, issued revised guide-
lines for implementation of the crime victim compensation grant program
(OVC, 2001). Although OVC had been lobbied to specifically encourage


  45For a brief summary of 12 programs designed to assist victims of financial crimes, see
Deem (2000).
420                                                            ELDER MISTREATMENT

states to include economic crime as a compensable crime category and had
initially included language to that effect, in its final guidelines the OVC
instead noted in its preamble to the guidelines that economic crime (includ-
ing financial fraud of the elderly) was one of four emerging trends and that
states should consider covering the unmet needs of these crime victims.
Although the text of the guidelines clarifies that VOCA does not prohibit
coverage of nonviolent crimes, the guidelines also reiterate that the priority
under VOCA continues to be coverage for victims of violent crime. In
addition, although financial counseling services for victims of economic
crime is an allowable compensable expense, the guidelines specify that
compensation grants cannot generally be used to redress property damage
and loss, a form of compensation particularly relevant to victims of finan-
cial abuse.
     Furthermore, only as of 1997 could victim assistance programs funded
under VOCA serve victims of financial crimes (Deem, 2000). The absence
of a reference to financial victims in the proposed Victims’ Rights Constitu-
tional Amendment has been cited as symbolic of their second-class status
(Deem, 2000).


                    Criminal Investigations and Prosecutions
    Following a report of elder abuse, a local APS agency generally con-
ducts an investigation and if criminal behavior is suspected refers the matter
to a local prosecutor’s office, which will typically undertake an investiga-
tion of its own. Alternatively, a law enforcement agency that has received
a report of elder abuse may also conduct an investigation and subsequently
refer the matter for prosecution. The successful prosecution of financial
abuse of the elderly has been characterized as rare (Wilber and Reynolds,
1996), with few prosecutions extending beyond the investigatory phase and
most cases being closed due to lack of evidence (Heisler, 2000; Hwang,
1996). It has been asserted that the criminal justice system provides little
deterrence to the commission of financial abuse of the elderly (Hwang,
1996). The extreme difficulty in detecting and proving abusive transactions
has been widely noted (Coker and Little, 1997; Dessin, 2000; Heisler and
Tewksbury, 1992). A number of barriers have been identified as impeding
these investigations and prosecutions.46
    For example, the initial task of defining financial abuse has been char-
acterized as “daunting” (Dessin, 2000). Evaluating whether financial abuse
occurred often requires complex and subjective determinations to distin-


   46For a description of some specialized law enforcement and prosecutor units established
to address financial abuse and promising criminal justice practices, see Heisler (2000).
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                            421

guish between acceptable transactions and exploitative conduct and to sepa-
rate misconduct from mismanagement (Central California Legal Services,
2001).
     Unlike physical abuse or neglect, the manifestations of financial abuse
are generally not immediately evident and discoverable (Dessin, 2000).
There is a general attitude that outsiders should not meddle in the financial
affairs of another (Dessin, 2000). As discussed, the victim is frequently
reluctant to report the abuse or may have been unaware of its occurrence
(Deem, 2000; Dessin, 2000). Voluntarily or involuntarily, the management
of the victim’s financial affairs may have been entrusted to another. The
perpetrator may have taken steps to hide the abuse from the victim, or the
victim may lack the capacity to recognize that the acts taken constituted
financial abuse (Dessin, 2000). Compounding the problem is that financial
abuse generally occurs in a private setting, enhancing the difficulty of detec-
tion (Dessin, 2000).
     Another barrier is that the victims’ diminished mental capacity may
make it unclear whether they understood and consented to the financial
transaction (Central California Legal Services, 2001). Alternatively, it can
be difficult to determine whether the elder person was the victim of unfair
persuasion or coercion (Central California Legal Services, 2001). As one
commentator has noted, “in a relationship in which one person is likely to
want to give and the other is likely to feel an entitlement to receive, how can
the law identify improper transactions?” (Dessin, 2000:213).
     Officials responsible for investigating and prosecuting financial abuse
must often review and evaluate complex records, frequently without the
assistance of a witness capable of testifying or willing to testify (Dessin,
2000). Relevant documents may be in the hands of perpetrators or may
have been destroyed (Nerenberg, 2000c). Bank officials may resist releas-
ing records because of fear of breaching privacy or confidentiality laws
(Nerenberg, 2000c).
     Investigating and prosecuting financial abuse typically requires exper-
tise across a range of subject areas, and most law enforcement personnel
and many prosecutors lack this expertise, with training in these areas often
not provided and rotation through assignments preventing the acquisition
of needed knowledge (Coker and Little, 1997; Nerenberg, 2000c). As a
result of a lack of expertise, responsible officials may fail to recognize
financial abuse or to pursue it effectively (Nerenberg, 2000c). Alterna-
tively, officers and prosecutors with expertise may be inundated with such
cases and forced to prioritize and limit the scope of their efforts (Nerenberg,
2000c).
     Also, officials often view financial crimes as strictly civil matters and
discourage their prosecution (Nerenberg, 2000c). Alternatively, they may
perceive them as less serious or important than violent crimes and give them
422                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

low priority (Nerenberg, 2000c). Financial crimes may also be given a low
priority because investigating and prosecuting financial abuse can be ex-
tremely labor-intensive and time consuming. In addition, most police and
prosecutors’ offices lack adequate resources for handling complex financial
crimes. Advocates for the elderly argue that federal agencies should assist
the states in prosecuting elder abuse (AARP, 2001).
     Prosecutors may be unwilling to pursue such cases because the elderly
may be poor witnesses, particularly if because of diminished mental capac-
ity they are unable to recall details of the crime (Nerenberg, 2000c; Oh,
1999). Particularly frail victims are likely to decline, become incapacitated,
or die during the course of what are often protracted proceedings
(Nerenberg, 2000c). Elders may find the criminal justice system incompre-
hensible and inaccessible, particularly when the individual has a physical or
mental disability (Nerenberg, 2000c). Calls have been made for improved
communication with victims throughout the criminal justice process (Deem,
2000).
     Even when a report has been received and an investigation is proceed-
ing, the perpetrator may continue to deplete the elder person’s assets be-
cause many states have inadequate laws to freeze the victim’s assets or to
limit the perpetrator’s ability to access those assets during the investigation
(Nerenberg, 2000c). Complaints have been lodged that victims are not
permitted to provide input into how much restitution to impose and that
such restitution is often not a priority of the criminal justice system (Deem,
2000). It has been claimed that many judges fail to order restitution,
prosecutors seldom ask for it, the system fails to consider the full value of
the victims’ financial losses, there is an absence of a designated agency
overseeing restitution, and victims are not provided help in recovering funds
(Nerenberg, 2000c).
     There may also be a lack of a clear definition of where jurisdiction lies
in such a case, and if the activities crossed county, state, and federal bound-
aries, responsibility for investigation and prosecution may be unclear and
resisted by various officials (Nerenberg, 2000c). Further complicating the
assumption of responsibility is that financial abuse may occur in conjunc-
tion with other crimes, such as assault, neglect, or false imprisonment,
which are handled by different police or prosecutorial units (Nerenberg,
2000c). Because securing needed evidence can take a long time and because
the abuse may not be discovered until long after it occurred, the applicable
statute of limitations may pose a significant barrier (Nerenberg, 2000c).
     There are two general categories of criminal laws that the states use to
punish individuals who financially abuse the elderly (Dessin, 2000). First,
such abuse may be criminally prosecuted under the state’s general theft,
extortion, or fraud statutes (Dessin, 2000; Moskowitz, 1998b), with some
states permitting the sentencing judge to treat the advanced age of the
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                                423

victim as an aggravating factor (Dessin, 2000; Moskowitz, 1998b;
Nerenberg, 2000c). Alternatively, perpetrators may be prosecuted under a
specific penal statute that addresses (1) abuse of vulnerable adults (which
either by legislation or by judicial interpretation has been extended to
include elder persons), (2) elder abuse in general, or (3) financial abuse of
the elderly specifically (Dessin, 2000; Moskowitz, 1998b). It has been
estimated, however, that fewer than half of the states provide criminal
penalties that directly address elder abuse (AARP, 2001). Advocates for the
elderly assert that the federal government should encourage all states to
make financial exploitation of older people a specific criminal offense to
promote its prosecution (AARP, 2001). Empirical evidence, however, has
not been generated to establish that the availability of such specifically
targeted penal statutes results in either increased prosecution rates or deter-
rence of such crimes.


                                       Civil Remedies
     Although there may be a tendency to turn first to the criminal justice
system (Mixson et al., 1992),47 a range of civil remedies is also available for
responding to financial abuse of the elderly. For example, in 1991 the
California legislature enacted the Elder and Dependent Adult Civil Protec-
tion Act (CAL. HtmlResAnchor Welf. and Inst. Code §5600 et seq.).48 This
legislation established civil remedies against individuals and entities that
committed elder abuse and provided incentives for attorneys to pursue such
cases. It has been asserted, however, that most litigators ignored this act
until a relatively recent opinion by the California Supreme Court estab-
lished that considerable financial exposure can result from elder abuse
(Delaney v Baker, 971 P.2d 986 (Ca. 1999); Mehta, 2000).
     In general, civil litigation for financial abuse of the elderly has been
infrequent (Moskowitz, 1998a), although it has been suggested that there
will be more such litigation as civil and criminal agencies work together
more cooperatively (Heisler and Quinn, 1995). A number of difficulties
have been identified in conjunction with pursuing a civil remedy for finan-
cial abuse of the elderly. They include that the standard of proof typically
applied to abuse cases in the civil system is clear and convincing evidence
that the abuse occurred. Some advocates believe that this standard is too



    47But see Heisler (2000), “Because elder abuse was rarely viewed as criminal conduct,
litigation historically has been brought in civil courts” (p. 52).
    48Similarly, Illinois established that treble damages and attorney fees be available for a civil
judgment deciding property has been converted or stolen from an elder person by threat or
deception (Moskowitz, 1998b).
424                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

demanding considering the difficulties noted above in establishing that fi-
nancial abuse occurred and that a preponderance of the evidence standard
would be better (Nerenberg, 2000c).
     Another barrier to the pursuit of a civil remedy is the frequent unwill-
ingness of attorneys to handle these cases (Moskowitz, 1998a, 1998b;
Nerenberg, 2000c). Factors attributed to this shortage are the lack of
incentives for attorneys to take such cases, which can be financially risky
for the attorneys who must typically invest considerable time in the case
and risk not getting paid if the victim dies before the case is resolved
(Moskowitz, 1998b; Nerenberg, 2000c). Also, attorneys’ fees may be diffi-
cult to collect as the perpetrator may be judgment proof and judges may be
unable or reluctant to award such fees (Nerenberg, 2000c). If attorneys’
fees are not available from the perpetrator, the misappropriated property
may represent the elder person’s life savings but still represent a relatively
small sum in comparison to the attorneys’ fees and the costs of litigation
(Moskowitz, 1998b). Publicly funded legal assistance programs could pro-
vide an alternative source of attorneys, but these programs have been sig-
nificantly curtailed in recent years (Nerenberg, 2000c). Problems of proof
have also been cited as a disincentive for attorneys considering whether to
accept such a case as victims often suffer from diminished mental capacity,
memory loss, or speech difficulties (Moskowitz, 1998b). In addition, such
cases require multiskilled attorneys who possess both litigation and finan-
cial skills (Nerenberg, 2000c).
     Another barrier is the lack of agreement over what level of decision-
making capacity is needed for various contractual agreements. Although
there is general agreement over the level of capacity necessary to make a
will, there is less agreement, for example, over the level of capacity needed
to give gifts or to get married (Nerenberg, 2000c). The following is a
discussion of some specific civil remedies that may be available.


Fraud
    Among the civil penalties for financial abuse are traditional tort rem-
edies for conversion and fraud (Dessin, 2000). For the reasons discussed
above, attorneys have been generally reluctant to pursue such civil remedies
on behalf of elderly clients who have been the victims of financial abuse.
One advantage, however, of these remedies is that punitive damages may be
available against the perpetrator. For example, in 1998 the Alabama Su-
preme Court approved an award of punitive damages to a couple who were
defrauded by an insurance agent into cashing in their paid-up policy and
buying other coverage (Frolik, 2001). At the same time, curbs on punitive
damages have been instituted in a number of states, and many judges are
reluctant to allow them to be awarded.
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                           425

Undue Influence
     An alternative civil remedy that may be available is a claim that a
transaction was the product of undue influence (Dessin, 2000). Although
this remedy varies from state to state, the doctrine is generally available to
set aside both inter vivos transfers and transfers at death (Dessin, 2000).
Undue influence consists of the concerted, deliberate effort to assume con-
trol over another person’s decision making (Nerenberg, 2000c). Just as
transactions made by persons who lack mental capacity are not legal, trans-
actions by persons who are victims of undue influence are also illegal
(Nerenberg, 2000c). Undue influence occurs when individuals use their
role and power to exploit the trust, dependency, and fear of others to
deceptively gain control over the decision making of another (Bernatz et al.,
2001; Quinn, 2000). Both mentally competent persons and persons with
diminished mental capacity can be unduly influenced (Nerenberg, 2000c;
Quinn, 2000). Elder persons have been identified as being vulnerable to
undue influence when there is a close relationship in which the abuser is
trusted and the elder person either suffers from cognitive impairments, is
socially isolated, or is in a major life transition, such as widowhood (Quinn,
2000).
     There have been complaints, however, that the standard used to estab-
lish undue influence is extremely vague and difficult to prove and that
existing assessment mechanisms are inadequate (Nerenberg, 2000c). It has
been noted that “[p]art of the difficulty in identifying and defining undue
influence stems from the fact that it is a process as opposed to a discrete
action, event, or condition” (Nerenberg, 2000c). It has also been noted
that little is known about the close bonds that develop naturally between
caregivers who provide personal care and companionship to elders in their
own homes and what constitutes exploitation as opposed to gift giving
under these circumstances (Quinn, 2000).


Protective Orders
     A protective order is another type of civil remedy that may be available
to redress or prevent financial abuse of the elderly. For example, an order
could be obtained to prevent an individual from committing further finan-
cial abuse, to stay away from the victim, to provide a financial accounting,
or to pay the costs the elder person incurred in seeking the protective order
(Dessin, 2000; Moskowitz, 1998b). Such protective orders, however, do
not appear to have been widely used in responding to the financial abuse of
the elderly and have been asserted to be a relatively ineffective response
(Brandl and Meuer, 2000).
426                                                              ELDER MISTREATMENT

Abuse of Power of Attorney49
     A general power of attorney appoints one individual to act in place of,
or on behalf of, another person. For example, a homebound elder person
may grant a power of attorney to a family member to conduct transactions
at the bank on his or her behalf. A durable power of attorney continues
after the principal loses decision-making capacity. The power may become
effective when signed or may be a “springing power of attorney” that takes
effect at a specified future time or on the occurrence of a specified future
event or contingency (e.g., the incapacity of the principal). States have
enacted a range of statutes to punish those who abuse powers of attorney
(Brandl and Meuer, 2000). The misuse of a power of attorney has been
explicitly classified as a theft (Arizona), a violation of an elder adult abuse
statute (Utah, Montana, Nevada), an embezzlement (California, Okla-
homa), and an exploitation of an infirm individual (Louisiana) (Thilges,
2000).
     A durable power of attorney provides a simple, easily implemented,
inexpensive tool for providing financial assistance to the elderly, but it is
also subject to abuse (Nerenberg, 2000c; Weiler, 1989). Indeed, abuse of
the durable power of attorney has been called an ”invisible epidemic,” a
“license to steal,” and the crime of the 1990s by practitioners who work
with the elderly, in part because of the ease with which people can obtain
and misuse durable power of attorney authority (Coker and Little, 1997;
Hwang, 1996; Weiler, 1989).50
     Among the abuses of powers of attorney that have been identified are
having a power of attorney signed by a person who has a cognitive impair-
ment at the time, using the power after it has terminated (e.g., the principal
becomes incapacitated and the power is not a durable power), or using the
power for purposes beyond those for which it was intended (Nerenberg,
2000c). The law generally presumes that the agent has the principal’s
permission to transact whatever business the document authorizes and un-
less the victim is able to testify, which is often not possible, it is difficult to
prove otherwise (Hwang, 1996). It has been noted that few states require
any type of registration by an agent, there are no mechanisms to ensure the
principal has mental capacity at the time of signing or has not been coerced
into signing, elders may not realize the extent of the authority they are




   49For a discussion of civil remedies available when a perpetrator has occupied a fiduciary
status in general, see Moskowitz (1998b).
   50A 1994 survey of attorneys and service providers for the elderly found that two-thirds of
the 410 respondents reported cases of abuse of the durable power of attorney and 38 percent
knew of five or more such cases (Sacks, 1996).
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                           427

assigning, elder persons may be imbued with a false sense of security by the
fact that a notary must witness the signing of a power of attorney,51 there
are no requirements that the principal be notified when the power of attor-
ney has been exercised, and there are few means to ascertain if a power of
attorney is no longer effective or has been revoked (Nerenberg, 2000c).
Other identified limitations are that the agent does not have to post a bond
guaranteeing adherence to his or her fiduciary responsibilities, notice of the
assignment of such authority is not provided to other individuals, including
relatives of the elder person, there is no third party monitoring of the
actions taken, the agent is not required to maintain or present records, and
there is no way to regain misappropriated or mishandled assets short of a
civil law suit (Heisler and Quinn, 1995; Weiler, 1989).
     In general, if abuses occur, they are difficult to prove or rectify
(Nerenberg, 2000c). Not surprisingly, it has been reported that although
financial abuse through the illegal use of a power of attorney is frequent,
few legal actions alleging the abuse of this power have been filed and even
fewer have been successful (Oh, 1999). Civil actions may be fruitless as
agents may be relatively judgment proof having exhausted the assets ob-
tained from the elder person and lacking assets of their own (Henningsen,
2000). Similarly, criminal actions may be precluded by broad grants of
authority to the agent that make it difficult to prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the agents exceeded the scope of their authority (Henningsen,
2000). Although some states have explored ways to bring more account-
ability into the use of this mechanism, it has been reported that “[t]hese
efforts have met with mixed success” (Nerenberg, 2000c).52


Appointment of Guardian/Conservator
     Perhaps the most drastic step that can be taken in response to financial
abuse of an elder person is the appointment of a guardian (alternatively
referred to as a conservator or a committee in some states) to make finan-
cial decisions for an elder person. Such an appointment requires a showing
that the elder person lacks decision-making capacity. Because of its rela-
tively drastic nature, concerted efforts have been made to establish less
restrictive alternatives such as limited or partial guardianships and tempo-
rary guardianships (Heisler and Quinn, 1995).




   51The role of the notary is simply to attest that the person signing the document is who he
or she claims to be.
   52For an excellent description of how attorneys can better draft powers of attorney and
advise clients to avoid financial abuse, see Henningsen (2000).
428                                                              ELDER MISTREATMENT

     Although establishing a guardianship or a conservatorship can be a
useful mechanism for conducting the financial affairs of elder persons who
lack decision-making capacity and can help shield their assets from abuse
or be used to recover lost assets (Heisler and Quinn, 1995), a number of
difficulties have been associated with this mechanism, and it is a remedy
that is dreaded by many elder persons. For example, the costs of establish-
ing and administering a guardianship can pose a significant drain on an
elder person’s resources (Nerenberg, 2000c) and it can be relatively com-
plex and intrusive.53 Also, individuals seeking establishment of a guardian-
ship for an elderly person may be acting in their own interests rather than
attempting to assist an elderly person in need (Heisler and Quinn, 1995). In
addition, although establishing a guardianship requires judicial involve-
ment, the court may not be provided with critical information or conduct a
neutral investigation that focuses on the capacity of a proposed guardian to
provide needed services to the elder person (Heisler and Quinn, 1995).
     In addition, it may be difficult to obtain a reliable and trustworthy
candidate to serve as guardian (Nerenberg, 2000c). Family members and
friends of the elder person may not be available or interested in assuming
such a role. Also, adequate court monitoring of the guardian may not be
available (Heisler and Quinn, 1995). Public guardianship programs were
created to serve vulnerable individuals and are usually more accountable
(Roby and Sullivan, 2000), but many communities do not have public
guardians, and where they do exist, the demand often far exceeds the
supply (Nerenberg, 2000c). As a supplement, some private nonprofit agen-
cies have started guardianship programs. Another option that has emerged
is the use of private professional guardians and fiduciaries, although there
have been reports of professional criminals seeking to fill these roles. Each
of these options may also provide a further drain on the elder person’s
assets.
     In general, there is little screening of potential candidates and review of
their qualifications, notwithstanding that they may be responsible for man-
aging significant wealth and ensuring the financial health of the elder per-
son (Nerenberg, 2000c). Ensuring subsequent accountability by appointed
guardians can also be problematic (Nerenberg, 2000c). The powers as-



   53As discussed, alternatives such as durable powers of attorney can also be subject to
abuse. Research has not been conducted on which of these measures leaves an elderly person
more vulnerable, is more likely to be misused, or has more egregious consequences for an
elderly person when misused. However, the law pertaining to the establishment of
guardianships generally expresses a preference for alternatives that have been established by
the elderly person and that ostensibly are less comprehensive in their assigned powers than is
typically true of a guardianship.
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                          429

signed to a guardian can be abused to misappropriate the elder person’s
assets. Periodic exposés have found guardians stealing funds from their
wards. Although courts are ostensibly charged with this responsibility,
their resources are often not sufficient to provide adequate ongoing investi-
gation and monitoring of guardianships.
     Also, the negative stigma associated with the establishment of a guard-
ianship has made it an unattractive alternative for many elder persons and
their families. One commentator wrote, “[t]o some seniors, the threat of
being placed under guardianship is as terrifying as the threat of nursing
home placement” (Nerenberg, 2000c). Advocates for the elderly have ar-
gued that the federal government should encourage the states to create less
restrictive alternatives to guardianship and to educate those who are acting
as guardians (AARP, 2001).


Limitations of Legal Interventions in General
    Beauchamp (2001) argues that legal interventions to redress financial
abuse of the elderly will inevitably be flawed and that no set of laws can be
made perfect. In particular, he asserts an inherent tension between compet-
ing priorities that, on the one hand, seek to protect elder persons from
people who desire to financially abuse them and, on the other hand, seek to
respect the wishes of elder persons, which often include a desire to retain
their independence. Also, he notes that the greater the level and extent of
protections established, the greater the cost. He concludes the problem
may not be a need to reform the law or to create new laws, but a need to
enforce existing law. Furthermore, he contends, any approach will necessi-
tate reliance on the good faith and efforts of the people assisting elder
persons with their financial affairs, whether it be a family member, a fidu-
ciary, or a judge, and there is little that laws can do to make people more
caring or diligent in their duties.


                            PREVENTIVE MEASURES
    Because investigating and proving financial abuse is often difficult and
because perpetrators often spend or dissipate assets before abuse is discov-
ered, preventive measures are the preferred means for addressing financial
abuse of the elderly (Central California Legal Services, 2001).54 A number



   54Addressing elder abuse in general, a report of the U.S. General Accounting Office con-
cluded that creating a high level of public and professional awareness of elder abuse was the
most effective means for redressing elder abuse, more so than either mandatory or voluntary
reporting laws (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1991).
430                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

of factors have been identified as likely to prevent financial abuse of the
elderly, although this identification is generally derived from personal expe-
rience rather than from empirical investigation. A variety of approaches for
identifying or preventing financial abuse have also been proposed or imple-
mented, although little systematic evaluation has been conducted of their
effectiveness. These approaches can be organized according to the indi-
viduals charged with preventing this abuse.


       Elder Persons or Family Members and Friends of the Elderly
     The first set of preventive approaches addresses steps elder persons and
family members and friends of the elderly should take. Many advocates
argue that the best measure is to prevent isolation by helping the elder
person to stay in close contact with multiple friends and relatives (Hoban,
2000; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001; Podnieks, 1992;
Quinn, 2000; Wilber and Reynolds, 1996; Zimka, 1997). Although, as
noted, family members have been identified as the most likely perpetrators
of financial abuse of the elderly, anecdotal accounts suggest that such abuse
is not the result of a conspiracy among a number of relatives, but rather
represents the actions of a single family member who has isolated the elder
person from other family members or friends. Greater involvement of
family members and friends of the elderly person can help prevent or rem-
edy this isolation. Such isolation, it has been argued, can also be avoided by
encouraging or helping the elderly person to be active in community affairs,
senior centers, or religious or charitable organizations (Hoban, 2000; Na-
tional Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001; Zimka, 1997). Advocates
also emphasize the importance of educating the elderly to recognize finan-
cial victimization (Coker and Little, 1997; Podnieks, 1992).
     Another series of preventive steps addresses transactions conducted
with financial institutions. Recommendations include that checks received
on a regular basis be mailed directly to banks to reduce the risk of theft
(Hoban, 2000; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001; Zimka,
1997). Similarly, it has been suggested that routine bills, such as utility
bills, be paid automatically from checking or savings accounts (Zimka,
1997). Arrangements might also be made that any effort to expand the
number of individuals with access to an elder person’s bank account result
in the notification or require the consent of a third party (National Clear-
inghouse on Family Violence, 2001).
     Other steps identified to prevent financial abuse include arranging for
the payment of bills by a trusted friend, family member, or bill paying
service (Zimka, 1997) or asking a trusted friend or family member to
review all papers before they are signed (Hoban, 2000; National Clearing-
house on Family Violence, 2001). A written plan for repayment should be
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                           431

signed before money is loaned (National Clearinghouse on Family Vio-
lence, 2001). References of people being hired to serve as caregivers should
be carefully screened and attention given to a caregiver who tries to isolate
an older person (Zimka, 1997).
     A number of suggestions have been made to prevent abuse of a durable
power of attorney. It has been suggested that the elder person carefully
choose a trustworthy friend or relative to act as the agent, appoint two
trustworthy persons to act jointly thereby creating a check on their indi-
vidual actions, establish a “springing power of attorney” that does not take
effect until a specific event occurs such as the loss of capacity, and specify
that the power of attorney does not take effect until two doctors have
certified that the individual is incapacitated (Hwang, 1996). Important
legal actions, such as preparing or revising a will and establishing a power
of attorney, should be done with a lawyer’s assistance (Hoban, 2000; Na-
tional Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001).
     When financial abuse is suspected, a number of courses of action have
been suggested for elder persons or for individuals who are concerned
about the well-being of the elderly. They include contacting a bank and
requesting that it flag and observe activity in the elder person’s account,
arranging for a review of account activity and associated signatures, trans-
ferring funds to a new account or closing an old account, and requesting a
bank investigation (Central California Legal Services, 2001; National Clear-
inghouse on Family Violence, 2001). Similarly, steps can be taken to
revoke a power of attorney and to request an accounting (Central Califor-
nia Legal Services, 2001; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence,
2001). The Social Security Administration, the Veteran’s Administration,
or a pension board can be notified of the possible theft of benefit or annuity
checks, of a new representative payee, or of new arrangements for direct
deposit or delivery of checks (Central California Legal Services, 2001).
Finally, steps can be initiated to remove a perpetrator from the home of the
elder person or to establish a guardianship to protect the assets of the elder
person (National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001).


                           Financial Institutions
    A group of individuals frequently cited as being best positioned to
provide early detection of possible financial abuse are employees of banks
or other financial institutions who interact with the elderly person or pro-
cess account activity (Choi et al., 1999; National Clearinghouse on Family
Violence, 2001; Podnieks, 1992; Zimka, 1997). One commentator noted
that “[b]ank employees, given their frequent contact with older clients who
prefer personal bank visits to automatic teller machines, are often the first
to spot suspicious banking activity that may be indicative of abuse” (Tom,
432                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

2001). The NEAIS report concluded that “banks are in a good position to
observe financial abuse and concerted attention should be given to how to
better involve them” (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1998).
     Alternatively, some retirement communities provide financial advice
and assistance to members of the community. For a description of one such
service that provided assistance with daily money management, see Bassuk
(2001). Many elderly individuals who are the most likely targets of finan-
cial abuse are not members of such communities. Nevertheless, it has been
argued that such models should be expanded to be readily available to all
elderly individuals who need such advice and assistance (Bassuk, 2001).
     In general, a series of recommendations targeted at the financial indus-
try and its employees have been generated to minimize financial abuse of
the elderly (Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 2001).55 Among the steps
recommended are that financial institutions employ training programs to
help employees identify and redress such abuse (Commonwealth of Massa-
chusetts, 2001; National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, 2001). Such a
program implemented in New York provides instruction on who com-
monly commits financial exploitation, typical scenarios that lead to finan-
cial exploitation, ways to detect financial abuse, a model protocol for ac-
tion, and prevention training (New York State Department of Law, 2000).
Similarly, bank employees in Massachusetts received special training in the
identification of possible cases of abuse of older persons’ bank accounts
(Price and Fox, 1997).56 This training led to the identification of a number
of cases of financial abuse (Price and Fox, 1997). Also, employees can be
encouraged to tell older customers about good financial practices and ways
to prevent financial abuse (National Clearinghouse on Family Violence,
2001).
     Along with the development of model programs, barriers limiting the
banking industry’s participation in efforts to curb financial abuse of the
elderly have also been identified. For example, bank employees may be
hesitant to report customer financial information and potential financial
exploitation because of privacy laws and confidentiality requirements that
prohibit the disclosure of a client relationship or account information (Jack-
son, 2000; Tom, 2001; U.S. Congress, 2000).57 In response, advance



   55For a compilation of warning signs and suggestions generated specifically for Certified
Public Accountants, see Rush and Lank (2000).
   56The Massachusetts program is also being employed in California, Maryland, New York,
Oregon, Utah, and Virginia (Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 2001).
   57The banking industry has been reported to believe that statutes encouraging the volun-
tary reporting of elder abuse do not adequately shield financial institutions from liability
(Tom, 2001). However, others believe that exceptions within state and federal law allow
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                          433

directives have been designed that specifically permit banks to notify ac-
count holders and other named parties of activity that is inconsistent with
the account holders’ usual banking patterns (Tom, 2001).58 Alternatively,
financial institutions could be included within the list of mandated report-
ers of elder abuse, as in Arizona, although the banking industry has been
reported to resist such inclusion because of its fear of additional govern-
ment control over and involvement in its operations (Choi et al., 1999;
Tom, 2001). Some states have instituted laws that specifically provide
immunity to employees of financial institutions who had reasonable suspi-
cion that a consumer is a victim of financial abuse and reported this infor-
mation to the proper authorities (Jackson, 2000).


                   Businesses Providing Services to the Elderly
    Businesses that routinely provide services to the elderly can also help
minimize the potential for financial abuse of the elderly. For example, it
has been noted that many utility companies offer helpful services such as
direct payment plans, warning programs to notify customers before services
are turned off due to nonpayment, and payment averaging plans (Central
California Legal Services, 2001).


                                        Attorneys
     Attorneys are another group of individuals who may be well positioned
to identify and respond to the potential financial abuse of the elderly. It has
been suggested that attorneys be sensitive to the potential for financial
abuse when drawing up powers of attorney or other legal documents
(Podnieks, 1992) and proactively advise clients to limit the authority granted
when establishing a power of attorney (Zimka, 1997). In addition, it has
been suggested that steps be implemented to monitor an agent’s activity by
requiring an annual reporting to an outside party of the financial transac-
tions undertaken, including a listing of income and expenses (Zimka, 1997).
Another avenue is to encourage attorneys to ensure that older persons who


financial institutions to contact government entities and disclose otherwise private customer
records and information concerning suspected violations of the law and that this would
encompass elder abuse reports (U.S. Congress, 2000).
   58A similar approach has been implemented in Canada, where older persons have begun
authorizing their banks to monitor their accounts for unusually large transactions or unusual
patterns of transactions, to subsequently raise concerns with the account holder, and to warn
of the possibility of fraud (Smith, 1999). Resistance to financial advance directives has
reportedly come primarily from larger financial institutions that cite additional paperwork
and exposure to large class-action lawsuits as their reasons for not endorsing this approach
(Smith, 1999).
434                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

sign financial and legal documents are fully competent to do so (Moskowitz,
1998a; Smith, 1999) and have not been coerced by family members or
others into inappropriately disposing of their assets (Smith, 1999). Also, it
has been recommended that lawyers inform older clients of their fundamen-
tal right to asset control and personal decision making and explain to them
the consequences of various legal actions (Moskowitz, 1998a).


                                       Fiduciaries
     A fiduciary appointed to act on behalf of an elder person by necessity
exercises considerable control over the finances of the elder person. Al-
though advance planning regarding financial affairs and the execution of a
financial advance directive may be undertaken in an effort to avoid subse-
quent financial abuse, such efforts have been undercut when the elder
person’s designated agent engages in financial abuse (Kapp, 1995). A
number of steps have been identified to minimize the likelihood of financial
abuse by fiduciaries. For example, a need for greater numbers of specially
trained fiduciaries has been asserted (Sampson, 1996). But most proposals
call for improved tracking or accountability of the fiduciary (Nerenberg,
2000c).59 It has been suggested that in appropriate cases individuals who
act under a power of attorney be required to prepare an annual statement
setting out details of the year’s financial activities (Smith, 1999). Similarly,
it has been suggested that guardians and conservators be subject to IRS-
style audits that would be performed by a state agency that would ran-
domly select a small percentage of guardianships or conservatorships to
review their records and to investigate the wards’ situations (Beauchamp,
2001). Another suggestion is to delegate some of the duties of judges who
are ultimately responsible for supervising conservatorships and
guardianships to other officials who specialize in these appointments and
who may be better situated to investigate them (Beauchamp, 2001). It has
also been argued that too many elders are not represented at their compe-
tency hearings, that assigned powers are overly broad and based on conve-
nience rather than necessity, that statutorily required annual accountings
often go unfiled, and that curtailed rights of the elderly are rarely reviewed
and almost never restored, notwithstanding changes in the elder person’s
decision-making capacities (Sampson, 1996).
     Some commentators suggest that the best solution is to avoid a conser-
vatorship or guardianship altogether and to employ alternatives such as
trusts, durable powers of attorney, representative payees, and joint tenancy


   59For an annotated bibliography of materials addressing financial exploitation of the eld-
erly by a conservator, see Sampson (1996).
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                        435

that are more flexible, less costly, and avoid judicial scrutiny (Beauchamp,
2001; Weiler, 1989). At the same time, it has been recognized that these
alternatives may also present problems, including a lack of oversight and
means to ensure assets are devoted to the elder person’s needs (Beauchamp,
2001; Heisler and Quinn, 1995; Weiler, 1989). At least one commentator
has concluded no alternative is foolproof and “society may just have to rely
on the person who takes care of the vulnerable and hope that that person
does not take advantage of her position” (Beauchamp, 2001).


                               Health Care Providers
     Finally, it has been suggested that health care providers are in a unique
position to prevent financial abuse of the elderly (Bernatz et al., 2001;
Lavrisha, 1997). Health care providers who see their elderly patients regu-
larly may be in the best position to know if an older person’s mental
capabilities have declined to such an extent that the individual is subject to
financial abuse (Smith, 1999).60
     It has been suggested, for example, that nurses in the community and in
clinics are likely to encounter elder persons at risk and can assess the level
of social support available, provide education on how to avoid financial
exploitation, and make appropriate referrals to volunteer companion pro-
grams and the like (Lavrisha, 1997). In addition, it has been argued that
nurses have an ethical and often a legal responsibility to recognize and
detect potential financial mistreatment and that gerontological nurses in
particular can encourage the initiation of appropriate responses to financial
abuse such as the establishment of a representative payee, a durable power
of attorney, a trust, or a joint tenancy (Weiler, 1989). It has also been
recommended that when a person is diagnosed with a disorder that dimin-
ishes mental capacity (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease), health care providers
should warn the patient and family members about the potential for finan-
cial abuse and provide practical suggestions on how to avoid such abuse
(e.g., by having a cosigner on bank accounts) (Bernatz et al., 2001). One
physician has suggested that clinicians working with older people should
consider including questions about financial affairs in their routine history
and be particularly concerned when socially isolated and frail older people
talk of unpaid bills, new friends who are visiting regularly and borrowing
money, ongoing home renovations, or frequent large purchases (Cohen,
1998).


  60At the same time, an assessment of individuals 70 years of age or older who were
presented for treatment at a hospital emergency room found that one of the three areas with
which patients needed the most assistance was the management of finances (medications and
ambulation were the other two areas) (Fulmer and Cahill, 1984).
436                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

    Education regarding financial abuse of the elderly, warning signs, and
steps that can be taken to minimize or remedy such abuse could be targeted
at health care providers who regularly provide services to the elderly. In
addition, protocols for detecting elder abuse that include questions pertain-
ing to financial abuse have been developed for physicians (Kleinschmidt,
1997; Tueth, 2000), nurses (Fulmer and Cahill, 1984), and emergency
department professionals (Fulmer et al., 1992) and could be made more
readily available to them.


                  Social Services/Governmental Agencies
     Social services agencies may already be responsible for providing ser-
vices to elder persons who are vulnerable to financial abuse and they could
be assigned a specific or enhanced role in preventing such abuse. Alterna-
tively, they could be given responsibility for providing financial assistance
to the elderly. For example, as noted, some states have fiduciary abuse
specialist teams (FASTs), which include expert financial and legal consult-
ants, to help victims recover or prevent further loss of their assets (Bernatz
et al., 2001). Such teams could be made available to elder persons seeking
advice on or assistance with financial decisions as a means to prevent
financial abuse of the elderly.
     Alternatively, assessment instruments for detecting elder abuse, which
include signals of financial abuse, have been developed for caseworkers
visiting elders in the community (Reis, 2000; Sengstock and Hwalek, 1986).
However, one survey found little enthusiasm for involving social services
agencies in these surveillance efforts, with caseworkers stressing that sort-
ing out financial affairs was complex and time-consuming (Langan and
Means, 1996). In addition, it has been noted that social service agencies
have long recognized the need to provide financial assistance, including
assistance with daily money management, but the scope and availability of
such services vary greatly around the country and few free or low-cost
programs provide a full range of such services (Bassuk, 2001). It is also
likely that many elder persons would be reluctant to permit governmental
agencies and personnel to become involved in their financial affairs. More-
over, it has been noted that elders and their relatives are often not aware of
financial-management services offered by community-based agencies (Choi
and Mayer, 2000).


                     FUTURE RESEARCH NEEDED
    Two of the leading authorities on financial abuse of the elderly have
identified what they consider to be the important research questions.
Nerenberg writes:
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                            437

     [L]ittle is known about the extent or nature of financial crime. Apart
     from a few studies on telemarketing fraud, very little is known about
     other types of financial crime, including fraud by family members. Even
     less is known about the impact of financial crime on its victims, victims’
     service needs, and promising approaches to meeting those needs. . . .
     Even less is known about victims’ mental health or social service needs
     and effective approaches to addressing them (2000c:70).
In contrast, the NEAIS report (National Center on Elder Abuse, 1998)
raised the following research questions:
     Are there characteristics of the caregiving relationships among younger
     family members who financially exploit their older relatives that could be
     affected by service interventions for the perpetrators? What are those
     interventions? Are there services or education for persons aged 60+ that
     would help them from becoming victims of financial abuse, particularly
     by younger family members? How can employees of banks be educated
     and encouraged to identify and report incidents of financial exploitation
     that may come to their attention while serving elderly customers?
    The analysis provided in the course of this report has also identified a
number of research questions. Although greater attention has been given to
financial abuse of the elderly in recent years, most of the accompanying
commentary relies on anecdotal evidence, personal experience, or com-
monly shared beliefs. There is a great need for a research foundation to be
generated to inform the debate over how best to respond to this abuse. In
addition to the many issues that have not been subject to systematic re-
search, there is a need for existing studies that rely on small samples to be
replicated at a national or regional level and for this research to be con-
ducted in a methodologically rigorous manner. Conducting research on
elder abuse in general has proven to be difficult (see Comijs et al., 2000;
Thomas, 2000), and these same difficulties generally apply to research on
financial abuse of the elderly.61
    In addition, there are special challenges associated with conducting
research on financial abuse of the elderly. These challenges include the
absence of a consistent, objective operational definition of what constitutes
financial abuse; ascertaining what impact, if any, cultural differences and
subjective perceptions (especially those of the elderly person) should play;
whether a minimal financial amount should be involved before financial
abuse is considered to have occurred; particular difficulties associated with



   61See Langan and Means (1996); Research on financial abuse is often quite limited, being
based on very small samples or an investigation of case files of those elderly people defined by
statutory agencies as victims of abuse.
438                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

detecting and establishing the occurrence of financial abuse; what role the
intent of the alleged perpetrator should play; discerning the existence, rel-
evance, and impact of the tacit acknowledgment and consent of the elder
person; and whether, particularly for smaller financial amounts, a pattern
of abuse is required or a single incident will suffice to establish abuse.
     The following questions also need specific empirical examination. What
is the prevalence of financial abuse of the elderly? Because it is under-
reported and difficult to detect, it is difficult to mobilize public interest in
this issue without this baseline information. What is the impact of financial
abuse on the elderly? For example, does it typically result in financial
devastation and a loss of independence? What impact does it have on the
health of the elder victims? What is its psychological impact, both short-
term and long-term? In a world of limited resources, does financial abuse
justify the same level of scrutiny or intervention as do other forms of elder
abuse? What other forms of elder abuse co-occur with financial abuse and
to what extent? Are reports of other types of elder abuse likely to address
most instances of financial abuse? If financial abuse is a distinct phenom-
enon, it may need separate and distinct responses.
     What types of financial abuse are most common? What are the charac-
teristics of the victims? For example, are they socially isolated, where do
they live, how old are they, what is their financial status, what is their
cognitive state, what is their family history/status, and what is their
ethnicity? Similarly, what are the characteristics of the perpetrators? For
example, what are their motivations and how many are close family mem-
bers, acquaintances, or caregivers of the elder person? What factors lead to
financial abuse? For example, what is the nature of the interaction between
victim and perpetrator and what risk factors associated with this interac-
tion can be identified? What decreases the likelihood of abuse? For ex-
ample, when do close family bonds buffer against financial abuse? What
variations are associated with the cultural context in which the elderly
person lives, and is it possible to develop objective standards that apply
appropriately to all cultural groups? Such information is a prerequisite for
developing and targeting interventions.
     What are the barriers to detecting financial abuse of the elderly? What
are indicators that family and professionals can watch for that suggest
financial abuse may be occurring? What are the best ways to identify
financial abuse? What are elder persons’ perceptions of what constitutes
financial abuse and how do they correspond with various professionals’
perceptions? How effective are reporting requirements? Does mandatory
reporting result in different rates of identification than voluntary reporting?
Do the various means of responding to financial abuse serve as deterrents
for future financial abuse? Do these various means adequately meet the
needs of elder victims? Which venue is most effective in responding to the
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                        439

financial abuse of the elderly? Do adequate laws exist to address financial
abuse, but the shortcoming lies with the enforcement of existing laws?
What advantages would be associated with establishing a national stan-
dard/uniform law? Would such an approach fail to take into account local
conditions and homogenize cultural variations?
     Perhaps the most critical and pressing problem is how to prevent finan-
cial abuse of the elderly in the first place. A number of options have been
identified, but information is lacking on which are the most effective. For
example, can financial advice and assistance be provided to the elderly in
such a way that their vulnerability to this abuse is decreased? What impact
do public education programs, particularly those aimed at the elderly, have
on the prevalence of financial abuse of the elderly?
     Clearly, considerable information is needed regarding the occurrence of
financial abuse of the elderly. In light of the nature of the problem and its
impact, related research should be a high priority.


                                    REFERENCES
AARP
  1993       Abused Elders or Older Battered Women? Report on the AARP Forum. Wash-
             ington, DC: AARP Women’s Initiative.
   2001      AARP on the Issues: Elder Abuse. Available: http://www.aarp.org/ontheissues/
             issueelderab.html.
Anetzberger, G.J.
   2000      Caregiving: Primary cause of elder abuse? Generations 24(2): 46–51.
Bassuk, K.
   2001      Financial abuse. In The Encyclopedia of Elder Care, M.D. Mezey, ed. New
             York: Springer Publishing Co.
Beauchamp, E.R.
   2001      Chapter 565: One more law to reform conservatorships and guardianships; but
             is it needed? McGeorge Law Review (Winter):647–669.
Beck, C.M., and L.R. Phillips
   1984      The unseen abuse: Why financial maltreatment of the elderly goes unrecognized.
             Journal of Gerontological Nursing 10(12):26–30.
Bernatz, S.I., S.J. Aziz, and L. Mosqueda
   2001      Financial abuse. In The Encyclopedia of Elder Care, M.D. Mezey, ed. New
             York: Springer Publishing Co.
Brandl, B.
   2000      Power and control: Understanding domestic abuse in later life. Generations
             24(2):39–45.
Brandl, B., and T. Meuer
   2000      Domestic abuse in later life. Elder Law Journal 8:297–335.
Brown, A.S.
   1999      Patterns of abuse among Native American elderly. In Understanding Elder Abuse
             in Minority Populations, T. Tatara, ed. Philadelphia, PA: Brunner/Mazel.
Capezuti, E., B.L. Brush, and W.T. Lawson
   1997      Reporting elder mistreatment. Journal of Gerontological Nursing 23:24–32.
440                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

Carroll, J.
    2001     Financial Abuse: Signs. Colorado State University Cooperative Extension. Avail-
             able: http://www.colostate.edu/Depts/CoopExt/SEA/Jean/finabuse.html.
Central California Legal Services (CCLS)
    2001     Elder Financial Abuse. Available: http://www.las.org/abuse/elder financial.html.
Choi, N.G., D.B. Kulick, and J. Mayer
    1999     Financial exploitation of elders: Analysis of risk factors based on county adult
             protective services data. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 10(3/4):39–62.
Choi, N.G., and J. Mayer
    2000     Elder abuse, neglect, and exploitation: Risk factors and prevention strategies.
             Journal of Gerontological Social Work 33(2):5–25.
Cohen, C.A.
    1998     Conmen and confusion: Consumer fraud and vulnerable older people in the
             community. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 46(1):118–119.
Coker, J., and B. Little
    1997     Investing in the future: Protecting the elderly from financial abuse. FBI Law
             Enforcement Bulletin (February):1–5.
Comijs, H.C., W. Dijkstra, L.M. Bouter, and J.H. Smit
    2000     The quality of data collection by an interview on the prevalence of elder mistreat-
             ment. The Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 12(1):57–72.
Commonwealth of Massachusetts
    2001     The Bank Reporting Project: An Edge Against Elder Financial Exploitation–
             Employee Training Manual. Boston, MA: Author.
Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs, American Medical Association
    1992     Physicians and domestic violence: Ethical considerations. The Journal of the
             American Medical Association 267(23):3190–3193.
County Welfare Directors Association
    1988     Protecting the Silent Population: Remedying Elder and Dependent Adult Abuse.
             Sacramento, CA: Author.
Deem, D.L.
    2000     Notes from the field: Observations in working with the forgotten victims of
             personal financial crimes. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 12(2):33–48.
Dessin, C.L.
    2000     Financial abuse of the elderly. Idaho Law Review 36:203–226.
Fielo, S.B.
    1987     How does crime affect the elderly? Most crimes against the elderly are sustained
             by the inner-city aged who live alone. Geriatric Nursing 1(March/April):80–83
Frolik, L.A.
    2001     Insurance fraud on the elderly. Trial (June):48–52.
Fulmer, T.T., and V.M. Cahill
    1984     Assessing elder abuse: A study. Journal of Gerontological Nursing 10(12):16–
             20.
Fulmer, T., D.J. McMahon, M. Baer-Hines, and B. Forget
    1992     Abuse, neglect, abandonment, violence, and exploitation: An analysis of all eld-
             erly patients seen in one emergency department during a six-month period. Jour-
             nal of Emergency Nursing 18(6):505–510.
Gilbert, A.N.
    1986     The ethics of mandatory elder abuse reporting statutes. Advances in Nursing
             Science 8(2):51–62.
Giordano, J.A., B.L. Yegidis, and N.H. Giordano
    1992     Victimization of the elderly: Individual and family characteristics of financial
             abuse. Arete 17:26–37.
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                           441

Gold D.T., and L.P. Gwyther
   1989      The prevention of elder abuse: An educational model. Family Relations 38(1):8–
             14.
Gordon, R.M.
   1986      Financial abuse of the elderly and state “Protective Services:” Changing strate-
             gies in the penal-welfare complex in the United States and Canada. Crime and
             Social Justice 26:116–134.
Griffin, L.W.
   1999      Elder maltreatment in the African-American community: You just don’t hit your
             momma!!! In Understanding Elder Abuse in Minority Populations, T. Tatara,
             ed. Philadelphia, PA: Brunner/Mazel.
Hall, J.M.
   1999      Abuse of black elders in Rhode Island. In Understanding Elder Abuse in Minor-
             ity Populations, T. Tatara, ed. Philadelphia, PA: Brunner/Mazel.
Heisler, C.J.
   1991      The role of the criminal justice system in elder abuse cases. Journal of Elder
             Abuse and Neglect 3(1):5–33.
   2000      Elder abuse and the criminal justice system: New awareness, new responses.
             Generations 24(2):52–58.
Heisler, C.J., and M.J. Quinn
   1995      A legal perspective. In Elder Mistreatment: Ethical Issues, Dilemmas, and Deci-
             sions, T.F. Johnson, ed. Binghamton, NY: Haworth Press.
Heisler, C.J., and J.E. Tewksbury
   1992      Fiduciary abuse of the elderly: A prosecutor’s perspective. Journal of Elder
             Abuse and Neglect 3(4):23–40.
Henningsen, E.
   2001      Financial Abuse of the Elderly, Wisconsin Department of Health and Family
             Services—Programs and Services. Available: http://www.dhfs.state.wi.us/aging/
             Age_News/N0111/finabus.html.
   2000      Preventing Financial Abuse by Agents Under Powers of Attorney.         Available:
             http://www.wisbar.org/wislawmag/2000/09/henning.html (also Wisconsin Law-
             yer 73(9):2000).
Hoban, S.
   2000      Elder abuse and neglect: It takes many forms—if you’re not looking, you may
             miss it. American Journal of Nursing 100(11):49–50.
Hudson, M.F., and J.R. Carlson
   1999      Elder abuse: Its meaning to Caucasians, African Americans, and Native Ameri-
             cans. In Understanding Elder Abuse in Minority Populations, T. Tatara, ed.
             Philadelphia, PA: Brunner/Mazel.
Hwang, M.H.
   1996      Durable power of attorney: Financial planning tool or license to steal? Journal
             of Long-Term Home Health Care 15(2):13–23.
Jackson, H.
   2000      Assemblymember Jackson’s Bill to Combat Elder Financial Abuse Passes Assem-
             bly Floor with Bipartisan Support: Measure Will Allow Finacial Institutions to
             Report Financial Abuse More Quickly Available: http://democrats.assembly.
             ca.gov/members/a35/press/p352000030.htm.
Jecker, N.S.
   1993      Privacy beliefs and the violent family: Extending the ethical argument for physi-
             cal intervention. The Journal of the American Medical Association 269(6):776–
             780.
442                                                              ELDER MISTREATMENT

Kapp, M.A.
   1995     Elder mistreatment: Legal interventions and policy uncertainties. Behavioral
            Sciences and the Law 13:365–380.
Kleinschmidt, K.C.
   1997     Elder abuse: A review. Annals of Emergency Medicine 30:63–72.
Klingbeil, K.S., and V.D. Boyd
   1984     Emergency room intervention: Detection, assessment, and treatment. In Bat-
            tered Women and Their Families: Intervention Strategies and Treatment Pro-
            grams, A.R. Roberts, ed. New York: Springer Publishing Co.
Kosberg, J.I., and D. Nahmiash
   1996     Characteristics of victims and perpetrators and milieus of abuse and neglect. In
            Abuse, Neglect, and Exploitation of Older Persons: Strategies for Assessment
            and Intervention, L.A. Baumhover and S.C. Beall, eds. Baltimore, MD: Health
            Professions Press.
Lachs, M.S., and K. Pillemer
   1995     Current concepts: Abuse and neglect of elderly persons. The New England
            Journal of Medicine 332(7):437–443.
Langan, J., and R. Means
   1996     Financial management and elderly people with dementia in the UK: As much a
            question of confusion as abuse? Ageing and Society 16:287–314.
Lavrisha, M.
   1997     What can nurses do about financial exploitation of elders? Journal of
            Gerontological Nursing 23(7):49–50.
Macolini, R.M.
   1995     Elder abuse policy: Considerations in research and legislation. Behavioral Sci-
            ences and the Law 13:349–363.
Marshall, C.E., D. Benton, and J.M. Brazier
   2000     Elder abuse: Using clinical tools to identify clues of mistreatment. Geriatrics
            55(2):42–53.
McGhee, J.L.
   1983     The vulnerability of elderly consumers. International Journal of Aging and Hu-
            man Development 17(3):223–246.
Mehta, S.G.
   2000     Respecting our elders. Los Angeles Lawyer 23:35.
Menio, D., and B.H. Keller
   2000     CARIE: A multifaceted approach to abuse prevention in nursing homes. Gen-
            erations 24(2):28–32.
Mixson, P., K. Chelucci, C. Heisler, W. Overman, P. Sripada, and P. Yates
   1992     The case of Mrs. M.: A multidisciplinary team staffing. Journal of Elder Abuse
            and Neglect 3 4):41–55.
Moon, A.
   1999     Elder abuse and neglect among the Korean elderly in the United States. In Under-
            standing Elder Abuse in Minority Populations, T. Tatara, ed. Philadelphia, PA:
            Brunner/Mazel.
   2000     Perceptions of elder abuse among various cultural groups: Similarities and differ-
            ences. Generations 24 (2):75–80.
Moskowitz, S.
   1998a New remedies for elder abuse and neglect. Probate and Property 12:52–56.
   1998b Saving granny from the wolf: Elder abuse and neglect—the legal framework.
            Connecticut Law Review 31:77–201.
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                          443

National Center on Elder Abuse
    1996    Elder Abuse: Questions and Answers. Washington, DC: National Center on
            Elder Abuse.
    1998    The National Elder Abuse Incidence Study: Final Report. Washington, DC:
            National Aging Information Center.
    2000    Summaries of the Statistical Data on Elder Abuse in Domestic Settings: An
            Exploratory Study of State Statistics for FY 93 and FY 94. Available: http://
            www.aoa.gov/abuse/report/Cexecsum.html [Accessed Feb. 28, 2000].
    2001    The Basics: What Is Elder Abuse? What Are the Major Types of Elder Abuse?
            Available: http://www.elderabusecenter.org/basic/.
National Clearinghouse on Family Violence, Health Canada (NCFV)
    2001    Financial Abuse of Older Adults. Available: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hppb/family
            violence/html/financialaben.html .
National Committee for the Prevention of Elder Abuse (NCPEA)
    2001    Elder Abuse: Financial Abuse. Available: http://www.preventelder abuse.org/
            elderabuse/fin_abuse.html.
Neale, A.V., M. Hwalek, C.S. Goodrich, and K.M. Quinn
    1996    The Illinois elder abuse system: Program description and administrative findings.
            The Gerontologist 36(4):502–511.
Nerenberg, L.
    1999    Culturally specific outreach in elder abuse. In Understanding Elder Abuse in
            Minority Populations, T. Tatara, ed. Philadelphia, PA: Brunner/Mazel.
    2000a Developing a service response to elder abuse. Generations 24(2):86–92.
    2000b Introduction. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 12(2).
    2000c Forgotten victims of financial crime and abuse: Facing the challenge. Journal of
            Elder Abuse and Neglect 12(2):49–72.
New York State Department of Law
    2000    Press Release, Financial Abuse of Elderly Targeted: Bank Employees to Receive
            Training to Combat Exploitation. Available: http://www.oag.state.ny. us/press/
            2000/sep/sep21b_00.html.
Office for Victims of Crime, United States Department of Justice (OVC)
    2001    Victims of Crime Act Victim Compensation Grant Program. Federal Register
            66(95):27158–27166.
Oh, S.
    1999    The hidden horror: Many elderly are abused by the people they trust the most—
            their own kids. Maclean’s 48.
Otto, J.M.
    2000    The role of adult protective services in addressing abuse. Generations 24(2):33–
            38.
Paris, B.E.C., D.E. Meier, T. Goldstein, M. Weiss, and E.D. Fein
    1995    Elder abuse and neglect: How to recognize warning signs and intervene. Geriat-
            rics 50(4):47–51.
Paveza, G.J.
    2001    Elder mistreatment: Overview. In The Encyclopedia of Elder Care, M.D. Mezey,
            ed. New York: Springer Publishing Co.
Pillemer, K., and D. Finkelhor
    1988    The prevalence of elder abuse: A random sample survey. The Gerontologist
            28(1):51–57.
Podnieks, E.
    1992    National survey on abuse of the elderly in Canada. Journal of Elder Abuse and
            Neglect 4(1/2):5–58.
444                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

Price, G., and C. Fox
    1997     The Massachusetts bank reporting project: An edge against elder financial ex-
             ploitation. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 8(4):59–71.
Quinn, M.J.
    2000     Undoing undue influence. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 12(2):9–16.
Ramsey-Klawsnik, H.
    2000     Elder-abuse offenders: A typology. Generations 24(2):17–22.
Reis, M.
    2000     The IOA Screen: An abuse-alert measure that dispels myths. Generations 24(2):
             13–16.
Roby, J.L., and R. Sullivan
    2000     Adult protection service laws: A comparison of state statutes from definition to
             case closure. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 12(3/4):17–51.
Rosenblatt, D.E., K.H. Cho, and P.W. Durance
    1996     Reporting mistreatment of older adults: The role of physicians. Journal of the
             American Geriatrics Society 44(1):65–70.
Rush, R.L., and R.J. Lank
    2000     How to Thwart Financial Fraud of Elderly Clients. Available: http://www.
             elderweb.com/default.php3?PageID=2206.
Sacks, D.
    1996     Prevention of financial abuse focus of New Institute at the Brookdale Center on
             Aging. Aging Magazine 367:86–89.
Sampson, D.
    1996     Annotated Bibliography: Elder Abuse—Financial Exploitation by a Conservator.
             Available: http://www.keln.org/bibs/sampson.html.
Sanchez, Y.M.
    1996     Distinguishing cultural expectations in assessment of financial exploitation. Jour-
             nal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 8(2):49–59.
Schiamberg, L.B., and D. Gans
    2000     Elder abuse by adult children: An applied ecological framework for understand-
             ing contextual risk factors and the intergenerational character of quality of life.
             International Journal of Aging and Human Development 50(4):329–359.
Sengstock, M.C., and M.A. Hwalek
    1986     Sengstock-Hwalek Comprehensive Index of Elder Abuse. Detroit, MI: Social
             Program Evaluators and Consultants, Inc.
Shiferaw, B., M.B. Mittelmark, J.L. Wofford, R.T. Anderson, P. Walls, and B. Rohrer
    1994     The investigation and outcome of reported cases of elder abuse: The Forsyth
             County Aging Study. The Gerontologist 34(1):123–125.
Sklar, J.B.
    2000     Elder and dependent adult fraud: A sample of actual cases to profile the offend-
             ers and the crimes they perpetrate. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 12(2):19–
             32.
Smith, R.S.
    1999     Fraud and Financial Abuse of Older Persons. No. 132 Australian Institute of
             Criminology. Canberra, Australia.
Stark, E., Flitcraft, A., and W. Frazier
    1979     Medicine and patriarchal violence. International Journal of Health 9:461–493.
Stiegel, L.
    2000     The changing role of the courts in elder-abuse cases. Generations, 24(2):59–64.
Sugg, N.K., and T. Inui
    1992     Primary care physicians’ response to domestic violence: Opening Pandora’s Box.
             The Journal of the American Medical Association 267(23):3157–3160.
FINANCIAL ABUSE OF THE ELDERLY                                                         445

Tatara, T., ed.
   1999     Understanding Elder Abuse in Minority Populations. Philadelphia, PA: Brunner/
            Mazel.
Thilges, A.A.
   2000     Comment, Abuse of a power of attorney: Who is more likely to be punished, the
            elder or the abuser? Journal of the American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers
            16:579–592.
Thomas, C.
   2000     The first national study of elder abuse and neglect: Contrast with results from
            other studies. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 12(1):1–14.
Tom, C.
   2001     Model advance directive combats financial abuse Available: http://www.asaging.
            org/at/at-201/model.html.
Tueth, M.J.
   2000     Exposing financial exploitation of impaired elderly persons. American Journal of
            Geriatric Psychiatry 8(2):104–111.
U.S. Congress, House Select Committee on Aging
   1981     A Report: Elder Abuse (An Examination of a Hidden Problem). Washington,
            DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
   1991     Elder Abuse: What Can Be Done? Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
            Office.
U.S. Congress, Senate Special Committee on Aging
   2000     Elder Fraud and Abuse: New Challenges in the Digital Economy. Washington,
            DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. General Accounting Office
   1991     Elder Abuse: Effectiveness of Reporting Laws and Other Factors. Washington,
            DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Vinton, L.
   1991     Abused older women: Battered women or abused elders? Journal of Women and
            Aging 3(3):5–19.
   1999      Working with abused older women from a feminist perspective. Journal of
            Women and Aging 11(2/3):85–100.
Vinton, L., J.A. Altholz, and S.T. Lobell-Boesch
   1997     A five-year follow up study of domestic violence programming for older battered
            women. Journal of Women and Aging 9(1/2):3–15.
Weiler, K.
   1989      Financial abuse of the elderly: Recognizing and acting on it. Journal of
            Gerontological Nursing 15(8):10–15.
Wilber, K.H., and S.L. Reynolds
   1996     Introducing a framework for defining financial abuse of the elderly. Journal of
            Elder Abuse and Neglect 8(2):61–80.
Wolf, R.S.
   2000     Introduction: The nature and scope of elder abuse. Generations 24(2):6–12.
Wolf, R.S., and K.A. Pillemer
   1989     Helping Elderly Victims: The Reality of Elder Abuse. New York: Columbia
            University Press.
Zimka, K.
   1997     Financial Exploitation of the Elderly. Colorado State University Cooperative
            Extension, Jefferson County. Available: http://www.ext.colostate.edu/pubs/
            columncc/cc970710.htm.
                  14
       Elder Abuse in Residential
        Long-Term Care Settings:
  What Is Known and What Information
              Is Needed?
                                Catherine Hawes*




                           There has been very limited research on elder
abuse, although there is some evidence that suggests it may be nearly as
widespread in the community as child abuse (Bourland, 1990; Fulmer,
1989; Kleinschmidt et al., 1997; National Center on Elder Abuse, 1998;
Pillemer and Finkelhor, 1988; U.S. House of Representatives, 1990). Al-
though attention has increased somewhat in recent years, most research on
elder abuse and neglect has focused on incidence, causes, and risk factors in
the community. Elderly who live in settings other than their own homes or
apartments or those of relatives have received relatively little attention from
either the research or policy communities. However, elderly who live in
residential settings that offer long-term supportive services are at particular
risk for abuse and neglect.1 They are particularly vulnerable because most
suffer from several chronic diseases that lead to limitations in physical and
cognitive functioning and are dependent on others (Spector et al., 2001). In
addition, many are either unable to report abuse or neglect or fearful that



   *Catherine Hawes, Ph.D., is a professor in the Department of Health Policy and Manage-
ment, School of Rural Public Health, at Texas A&M University System Health Science Cen-
ter.
   1Marshall and his colleagues assert that elder abuse is more common in homes than in
institutional or residential facility settings but offer no evidence to support this assertion
(Marshall et al., 2000). What they ignore is that although there may be more cases of
community-dwelling elderly, proportionally, there may be more cases in residential/institu-
tional long-term care settings.

                                            446
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                      447

such reporting may lead to retaliation or otherwise negatively affect their
lives (Hayley et al., 1996). Thus, as Shapira (2000) noted, “The elderly in
skilled nursing facilities are among the most vulnerable members of our
society. They are dependent on the . . . nursing facility operator for their
food, medicine, medical care, dental care, and a bed; a roof over their
heads; for assistance with virtually every daily activity.”
     On any given day, approximately 1.6 million people live in approxi-
mately 17,000 licensed nursing homes, and another estimated 900,000 to 1
million live in an estimated 45,000 residential care facilities, variously
known as personal care homes, adult congregate living facilities, domicili-
ary care homes, adult care homes, homes for the aged, and assisted living
facilities (Strahan, 1997; Hawes, et al., 1999, 1995a). Research suggests
that the 2.5 million vulnerable individuals in these settings are at much
higher risk for abuse and neglect than older persons who live at home, as
discussed below. Moreover, these figures may underestimate the number of
persons who are actually at risk for abuse or neglect in a nursing home.
Based on data from the National Mortality Followback Survey, researchers
estimate that more than two-fifths (43 percent) of all persons who turned
65 in 1990 or later will enter a nursing home at some time before they die
(Kemper and Murtaugh, 1991; Murtaugh et al., 1990). Moreover, of those
who enter a nursing home, more than half (55 percent) will have a total
lifetime use of at least one year. The probability of use increases dramati-
cally with age, rising from 17 percent for those aged 65 to 74 to 60 percent
for persons aged 85 to 94. Because women live longer than men, their
relative risk of lifetime use of a nursing home is higher (i.e., 52 percent
versus 33 percent). In addition, because the most rapidly growing segment
of the population is those aged 85 and older, the proportion of persons
estimated at risk for nursing home use at some time in their lives is expected
to increase over time. Thus, while only 2.5 million elders living in a
residential long-term care facility on any given day may be at risk for abuse,
over their lives many elderly may be at risk during a period of long-term
care facility use.
     The general goals of this paper are to present the available evidence
about the nature and scope of abuse and neglect in nursing homes and other
residential care facilities and the causes, as well as to suggest a research
agenda. To accomplish these goals, the paper is organized as follows:

    • Section 2 presents definitions of abuse and neglect;
    • Section 3 provides the available evidence about the nature and
scope of abuse and neglect in nursing homes;
    • Section 4 presents the available evidence about the nature and
scope of abuse and neglect in residential care facilities;
    • Section 5 explains the limitations of these estimates;
448                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

    • Section 6 discusses the sample design and data collection issues
associated with studies to determine the prevalence of abuse and neglect in
nursing homes and residential care facilities;
    • Section 7 discusses what is known about the causes of abuse and
neglect and presents the author’s recommendations for additional research.


                  DEFINITIONS OF ABUSE AND NEGLECT
     The definition of physical abuse is the area about which there is the
greatest agreement, both in terms of being “wrong” and in terms of what
constitutes physical abuse; it involves injury or harm to a person carried out
with the intention of causing suffering, pain, or impairment (Clarke and
Pierson, 1999; Lachs et al., 1994; Lachs and Pillemer, 1995; Tatara and
Kuzmeskus, 1996–1997). The Administration on Aging, in its instructions
to long-term care ombudsmen, defines abuse as “the willful infliction of
injury, unreasonable confinement, intimidation or cruel punishment with
resulting physical harm, pain, or mental anguish or deprivation by a per-
son, including a caregiver, of goods or services that are necessary to avoid
physical harm, mental anguish, or mental illness” (1998:13). This is consis-
tent with the definition used by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS, formerly the Health Care Financing Administration) in its
guidelines to the states on reporting of abuse and neglect in nursing homes,
as reported below.
     Physical abuse is generally thought to include hitting, slapping, push-
ing, or striking with objects. In nursing homes, other types of actions have
been included, such as improper use of physical or chemical restraints.
Physical abuse also typically includes sexual abuse or nonconsensual sexual
involvement of any kind, from rape to unwanted touching or indecent
exposure.2
     There is somewhat less agreement about whether verbal or psychoso-
cial abuse should be included in the general category of abuse when applied
to older persons. This is generally thought of as “intentional infliction of
anguish, pain, or distress through verbal or nonverbal acts” and includes
threats, harassment, and attempts to humiliate or intimidate the older per-
son (Clarke and Pierson, 1999:632).
     In focus group interviews conducted in 2000 (Hawes et al., 2001),


   2Clarke and Pierson (1999:635) argue that examples (or possibly indicators of potential
abuse and neglect) of abuse are “falls and fracture, physical or chemical restraints, malnutri-
tion, dehydration, bed sores, defective equipment, lack of supervision, weight gain or loss,
theft of money and personal property, unexpected or wrongful death, unsanitary conditions,
untrained or insufficient staff, over-sedation, substandard medical care, and poor personal
hygiene.”
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                          449

certified nursing assistants (CNAs) defined abusive actions that included
both physical and verbal or psychological abuse, such as:

   • aggressiveness with a resident;
   • rough handling;
   • pulling too hard on a resident;
   • yelling in anger;
   • threats;
   • punching, slapping, kicking, hitting; and
   • speaking in a harsh tone, cursing at a resident, or saying harsh or
mean things to a resident.

    Neglect of older persons is another area that has received increased
attention in recent years. As Clarke and Pierson noted, “Definitions of
neglect are probably the most disputed of any category” of maltreatment of
elderly persons (Clarke and Pierson, 1999:632). However, in general, ne-
glect is thought of as including “the refusal or failure of a caregiver to fulfill
his or her obligations or duties to an older person, including . . . providing
any food, clothing, medicine, shelter, supervision, and medical care and
services that a prudent person would deem essential for the well-being of
another” (Clarke and Pierson, 1999).
    CNAs who participated in focus groups also had very clear and specific
ideas about what constituted neglect in nursing homes (Hawes et al., 2001).
They mentioned a number of examples:

     • no oral/dental care;
     • not doing range of motion exercises;
     • not changing residents each time they are wet after an episode of
incontinence;
     • ignoring residents who are bedfast, particularly not offering activi-
ties to them;
     • not doing prescribed wound care;
     • not giving residents regular baths;
     • doing a one-person transfer when the resident requires a two-per-
son transfer;
     • not providing cuing or task segmentation to residents who need
that kind of assistance to maximize their independence;
     • not doing scheduled toileting or helping residents when they ask;
     • not keeping residents hydrated; and
     • turning off a call light and taking no action on the resident’s re-
quest.

    The federal government also has formal definitions of abuse and ne-
450                                                          ELDER MISTREATMENT

glect in nursing homes. The nursing home reforms contained in the Omni-
bus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 (OBRA 1987. Pub L. No. 100-203)
specified that nursing home residents had the “right to be free from verbal,
sexual, physical, and mental abuse, corporal punishment, and involuntary
seclusion” (42 CFR Ch. IV (10-1-98 Edition) §483.13 (b)). HCFA issued
regulations and guidelines implementing these provisions of the OBRA
1987 legislation. These regulations specified the following definitions:

   Abuse means the willful infliction of injury, unreasonable confine-
   ments, intimidation, or punishment with resulting physical harm, pain,
   or mental anguish.
   Neglect means failure to provide goods and services necessary to
   avoid physical harm, mental anguish, or mental illness.

     The federal regulations implementing OBRA 1987 also specified long-
term care facilities’ responsibility to “develop and implement written poli-
cies and procedures that prohibit mistreatment, neglect, and abuse of resi-
dents and misappropriation of resident property” (42 CFR Ch. IV (10-1-98
Edition) §483.13 (c)). Furthermore, the law required that the facility “must
not employ individuals who have been found guilty of abusing, neglecting,
or mistreating residents by a court of law or have had a finding entered into
the state nurse aide registry concerning abuse, neglect, mistreatment of
residents, or misappropriation of their property” (42 CFR Ch. IV (10-1-98
Edition) §483.13 (c)(1) (ii) (A) (B)).3


      EVIDENCE ABOUT THE NATURE AND PREVALENCE OF
           ABUSE AND NEGLECT IN NURSING HOMES
    For decades, nursing homes have been plagued with reports suggesting
widespread and serious maltreatment of residents, including abuse, neglect,
and theft of personal property (Douglass et al., 1980; Fontana, 1978; Insti-
tute of Medicine, 1986; Mendelson, 1974; Moss and Halamandaris, 1977;
New York State Moreland Act Commission, 1975, 1976; Ohio General
Assembly Nursing Home Commission, 1978; Stannard, 1973; U.S. Senate,
1970; U.S. Senate, 1971; U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging, 1974–
1975; Vladeck, 1980). In addition, a number of case studies, participant-
observation studies, interviews with nursing home staff, and interviews
with residents and ombudsmen provided evidence of abuse (Doty and


  3This lifetime ban was modified in certain cases under provisions of the 1997 Balanced
Budged Act. Balanced Budget Act of 1997, Conference Report to Accompany H.R. 2015.
105th Congress, 1st Session. House of Representatives, Report 105-217 (July 30, 1997).
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                       451

Sullivan, 1983; Douglass et al., 1980; Fontana, 1978; Gubrium, 1975;
Jacobs, 1969; Kayser-Jones, 1990; Monk et al., 1984; Stannard, 1973; U.S.
House of Representatives, Select Committee on Aging, 1990). Such condi-
tions were major factors in the passage of the nursing home reforms con-
tained in the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) of 1987 (OBRA,
1987).4 The OBRA 1987 reforms, the most sweeping set of legislative
changes to the way nursing homes were regulated since the passage of
Medicaid and Medicare, addressed multiple areas of resident care and qual-
ity of life. They also specified that residents had the right to be free from
verbal, sexual, physical, and mental abuse, including corporal punishment
and involuntary seclusion, and limited the use of physical restraints and
inappropriate use of psychotropic medications (Hawes, 1990; Elon and
Pawlson, 1992).
     Despite this federal law and reports over the preceding decades that
raised the possibility of widespread and serious abuse, there has never been
a systematic study of the prevalence of abuse in nursing homes. Indeed, it
is important to note that none of the studies discussed below involving
interviews with residents or with facility staff were designed with the inten-
tion of producing generalizable estimates to the nation as a whole. Never-
theless, the disparate evidence that is available and discussed below sug-
gests the existence of a serious problem that warrants further study.


                             Resident Risk Factors
     Several studies have examined the characteristics of individuals living
in community settings (e.g., their own home or that of others) in an attempt
to identify factors that place an older person at greater risk for being abused
or neglected. Such studies found that persons suffering abuse or neglect
were more likely to be old and nonwhite and to have greater limitations in
physical and cognitive functioning, although there has been some disagree-
ment about whether functional impairment in the activities of daily living
(ADL) is a risk factor for abuse (Bristowe and Collins, 1989; Johnson,
1991; Lachs et al., 1994; Lachs et al., 1996, 1997; Pillemer and Finkelhor,
1988; Podnieks, 1992). However, there is strong evidence that the presence
of cognitive impairment or dementia is associated with higher risk for being
abused (Coyne et al., 1993; Dyer et al., 2000; Homer and Gilleard, 1990;
O’Malley et al., 1983; Paveza et al., 1992; Pillemer and Finkelhor, 1988;
Pillemer and Suitor, 1992; Wolf and Pillemer, 1989).
     Studies of individual risk factors for elderly living in residential long-
term care facilities are more limited but generally suggest the existence of


  4The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 ~ PL 100-203.
452                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

        TABLE 14-1 Characteristics of Nursing Home Residents
        Characteristic                                       Percent

        Aged ≥ 85 years                                      49
        Nonwhite                                              9

        Receives assistance with ≥3 ADLs                     83
        Mild to moderate cognitive impairment                71
        Exhibits physically aggressive behaviors              9

        Exhibits any behaviors (e.g., verbally or
        physically aggressive, resists nursing care,
        socially inappropriate)                              30

        SOURCE: Krauss and Altman (1998).




similar risk factors for individual residents. For example, Burgess and her
colleagues argued, “The risk for abuse increases simply as a function of
their dependence on staff for safety, protection, and care” (Burgess et al.,
2000). They found that a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s or other dementia or
some type of memory loss or confusion was present at a somewhat higher
rate among nursing home residents who had been sexually abused than
among the average nursing home population, although those data were
from a small case study (Burgess et al., 2000). Similarly, the findings from
another study suggest that residents with behavioral symptoms, such as
physical aggressiveness, appear to be at higher risk for abuse by staff
(Pillemer and Bachman-Prehn, 1991), a finding supported by focus group
interviews with CNAs (Hawes et al., 2001) and studies of precipitating
factors among community-dwelling elders who have been abused (Pillemer
and Suitor, 1992; Ehrlich, 1993).
     Unfortunately, dependence on others for help with physical functioning
and impairment in cognitive functioning are common among the vast ma-
jority of nursing home residents, and difficult or challenging behaviors are
not uncommon, as displayed in Table 14-1. These behaviors are often a
product of neurological changes, memory loss, and communication deficits
associated with diseases such as Alzheimer’s. However, many staff mem-
bers often view aggressive resident behaviors or attempts to resist care as
intentional attempts by the resident to be difficult or to hurt staff, a belief
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                                     453

that makes such residents more likely to be handled roughly or abused by
staff (Hawes et al., 2001).


                 Reports of Abuse from Residents and Families

     I saw a nurse hit and yell at the lady across the hall because the nurse told
     the lady she didn’t have all day to wait on her. The lady made some
     remark. The nurse hit the lady and said, “Shut up.”
                                            Georgia Nursing Home Resident
                        (Atlanta Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program, 2000)
     A few studies have interviewed residents and family members about
their experiences in nursing homes and asked specific questions about abuse.
The Atlanta Long Term Care (LTC) Ombudsman Program (Atlanta Long-
Term Care Ombudsman Program, 2000) conducted the most recent study
under a grant funded by the National Ombudsman Resource Center. In
this study, ombudsmen interviewed 80 residents in 23 nursing homes in
Georgia.5 This survey found that 44 percent of the residents reported that
they had been abused, while 48 percent reported that they had been treated
roughly. For example, one resident noted:
     They throw me like a sack of feed . . . [and] that leaves marks on my
     breast.
                                            Georgia Nursing Home Resident
                        (Atlanta Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program, 2000)
     In addition, 38 percent of the residents reported that they had seen
other residents being abused, and 44 percent said they had seen other
residents being treated roughly. For example, as one resident reported:
     My roommate—they throw him in the bed. They handle him any kind of
     way. He can’t take up for himself.
                                            Georgia Nursing Home Resident
                        (Atlanta Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program, 2000)




   5The ombudsmen initially identified what they considered 10 problem facilities and re-
cruited residents from those nursing homes. The process was subsequently expanded to a
total of 23 facilities, based on local ombudsman identification of residents willing to speak
with the interviewers about issues of abuse and neglect. The authors reported, “Almost all
those approached agreed to be interviewed.” Those who declined cited fear of retaliation.
Finally, the ombudsmen used CMS Survey protocols to identify “interviewable” residents in
long-term care facilities (Atlanta Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program, 2000).
454                                                                ELDER MISTREATMENT

     Focus groups and individual interviews with residents and family mem-
bers for a study of the nursing home complaint-investigation process also
produced reports of abuse and severe neglect. Families reported finding
residents with bruises and abrasions, unexplained falls, some of which
caused fractures, and residents left for days with broken bones before the
family or resident’s physician were notified, such as the case reported be-
low.
      Have I seen abuse? No, not directly. But I’ve come in and found my
      mom battered and bruised. I mean, her whole face was bruised and
      swollen, the backs of her hands and arms were bruised, as if she tried to
      protect herself.
                        Daughter of a Texas Resident, 1999 (Hawes et al., 2000)


                        Reports of Abuse from Facility Staff

      Oh, yeah. I’ve seen abuse. Things like rough handling, pinching, pulling
      too hard on a resident to make them do what you want. Slapping, that
      too. People get so tired, working mandatory overtime, short-staffed. It’s
      not an excuse, but it makes it so hard for them to respond right.
                                   CNA from South Carolina (Hawes et al., 2000)
     A 1987 survey of 577 nursing home staff members from 31 facilities
found that more than one-third (36 percent) had witnessed at least one
incident of physical abuse during the preceding 12 months (Pillemer and
Moore, 1989).6 As displayed in Table 14-2, such incidents included exces-
sive use of physical restraints (21 percent); pushing, shoving, grabbing, or
pinching a resident (17 percent); slapping or hitting (13 percent); throwing
something at a resident (3 percent); kicking or hitting with a fist or object (2
percent). Ten percent of the staff members surveyed reported they had
committed such acts themselves.
     A total of 81 percent of the staff reported that they had observed and
40 percent had committed at least one incident of psychological abuse
during the same 12-month period. Psychological abuse included yelling in
anger, insulting or swearing at a resident, inappropriate isolation, threaten-
ing to hit or throw an object, or denying food or privileges. Yelling at a
resident in anger and insulting or swearing at a resident were the most
common acts observed, with 70 percent having observed yelling and 50
percent having observed a staff member insulting or swearing at a resident


  6Thirty-one of a potential sample of 77 facilities in one state met the facility size criteria,
agreed to participate in the study, and provided complete lists of staff.
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                                 455

TABLE 14-2 Results of Surveys of CNAs about Committing or
Witnessing Abuse and Neglect of Residents
                                              Rates of Self-Reported Behaviorsa

                                              Pillemer and           Pillemer and
                                              Moore                  Hudson
Abusive Behaviors                             (percentage)           (percentage)

Yelled at a resident in anger                 23                     51
Insulted or swore at a resident               10                     23
Threatened to hit or throw
  something at a resident                      2                      8
Pushed, grabbed, or shoved                     3                     17
Slapped or hit a resident                      3                      2
Thrown something at a resident                 1                      1
Excessive use of physical restraints           4                     Not reported

                                              Rates of Behaviors Witnessed by CNAs
                                                                   Not Asked

Yelling at a resident                         70
Insulting or swearing at a resident           50
Excessive use of physical restraints          21
Pushing, grabbing, shoving, or pinching       17
Slapping or hitting a resident                13
Throwing something at a resident               3
Kicking or hitting a resident                  2

   aPillemer and Moore (1989) surveyed 577 staff (nurses and CNAs) about incidents over a
12-month period. Pillemer and Hudson (1993) interviewed 211 staff about incidents during
the preceding 1-month period.



(Pillemer and Moore, 1989). Interviews with more than 200 staff members
who subsequently participated in an abuse-prevention training program
also indicated substantial levels of abusive behaviors by staff caregivers in
nursing homes.
     Focus groups with CNAs also provided quantitative and qualitative
data that supported the findings reported by Pillemer and Moore. For
example, North Shore Elder Services in Danvers, Massachusetts, conducted
a recent project on reducing abuse and neglect in nursing homes
(MacDonald, 2000). In this project, 77 CNAs from 31 nursing facilities
received training. As part of this project, CNAs were surveyed about
whether they had witnessed any incidents of abuse or neglect. Verbal abuse
was reported as fairly common: 58 percent of the CNAs said they had seen
a staff member yell at a resident in anger; 36 percent had seen staff insult or
swear at a resident; 11 percent had witnessed staff threatening to hit or
throw something at a resident (MacDonald, 2000).
456                                                  ELDER MISTREATMENT

     These CNAs also reported that they had witnessed incidents of rough
treatment and physical abuse of residents by other staff. Twenty-five per-
cent of the CNAs witnessed staff isolating a resident beyond what was
needed to manage his/her behavior; 21 percent witnessed restraint of a
resident beyond what was needed; 11 percent saw a resident being denied
food as punishment.
     In addition, the staff reported witnessing more explicit instances of
abuse. Twenty-one percent saw a resident pushed, grabbed, shoved, or
pinched in anger; 12 percent witnessed staff slapping a resident; 7 percent
saw a resident being kicked or hit with a fist; 3 percent saw staff throw
something at a resident; and 1 percent saw a resident being hit with an
object.


            Reports of Abuse from Health Care Professionals
     There are relatively few studies of health care professionals and issues
of abuse of nursing home residents, and most that exist focus on
underreporting and reasons for that phenomenon. However, one study did
suggest that abuse might be widespread. Emergency department physicians
conducted retrospective chart review of 328 nursing home residents admit-
ted to the emergency room. In nearly 1 in 5 (19 percent) of 253 cases with
adequate documentation of when the injury occurred, there was an unex-
plained delay in seeking medical treatment of 24 hours or more (Barlow et
al., 1998).


                 Reports of Abuse from Ombudsmen and
                    Adult Protective Services Agencies
     Another source of information on abuse and neglect in nursing homes
is data from the Long-Term Care Ombudsman program. The ombudsman
program was established in the early 1970s to “identify, investigate, and
resolve individual and systems level complaints” that affect residents in
nursing homes and residential care facilities (Huber et al., 2001:1). Federal
funds for the program are through the Older Americans Act, and some
programs also receive state funding (Huber et al., 1996).
     For some years, ombudsmen have reported incidents of abuse and
neglect in nursing homes (Monk et al., 1984). For example, one study that
surveyed agencies in 22 states reported 15,612 cases involving allegations
of abuse of nursing home residents received by such agencies as Adult
Protective Services, ombudsmen, and state Medicaid fraud units, which are
responsible for prosecuting abuse cases involving nursing homes (Tatara,
1990).
     Reports of abuse and neglect from ombudsmen are thought to have
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                                     457

become more reliable in recent years, even as their data suggest increasing
incidence. As part of their responsibilities, the ombudsman program estab-
lished a National Ombudsman Reporting System (NORS), using standard-
ized definitions of complaint types and resolutions (Administration on Ag-
ing, 1998). The 1998 compilation of complaints received by the state
Long-Term Care Ombudsman program and its parent agency, the Admin-
istration on Aging, using the NORS system, found that, nationwide, physi-
cal abuse was one of the five most frequent complaints to ombudsmen
about nursing homes (Administration on Aging, 2000). Ten percent, or
about 20,000, of the complaints received by ombudsmen during FY 1998
involved allegations of abuse, gross neglect, or exploitation, while another
5 percent related to financial abuse and misappropriation of property. In
addition, ombudsmen reported more than 1,700 allegations of sexual abuse
of nursing home residents during a two-year period (Burgess, personal
communication,7 November 2000; see also Burgess et al., 2000).


                           Deficiency Citations for Abuse
    Ninety-six percent of all facilities nationwide participate in the Medi-
care or Medicaid programs or both (Strahan, 1997). These facilities are
subject to annual surveys and to complaint investigations under federal law
and regulation governing participation in these programs. These surveys
also provide evidence of abuse and neglect in nursing homes.


Office of the DHHS Inspector General
     The Office of the Inspector General (OIG) in the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services reviewed data from the Health Care Financing
Administration’s (HCFA) Online Survey Certification and Reporting Sys-
tem (OSCAR) for one full survey cycle (1997–1998) in 10 states. The OIG
found 4,707 abuse complaints, involving nearly one-third of the facilities
certified to participate in the Medicare or Medicaid programs.8


Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
  The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS, formerly
HCFA) has reported even more current data on abuse in nursing homes. In


   7Personal communication and presentation at the Forensic Conference on Elder Abuse and
briefing for Attorney General Reno, sponsored by the U.S. Department of Justice, Washing-
ton, DC, November 2000.
   8The vast majority of complaints (e.g., about two-thirds) were not substantiated, an issue
discussed at greater length in the body of this report.
458                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

its Quarterly Report on the Progress of the Nursing Home Initiative for
January 2001, CMS reported the rate of citations for various types of
deficiencies, including abuse (U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices, Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2001). These citations
do not represent prevalence measures (e.g., the proportion of residents who
were abused); however, they do suggest the potential severity of the prob-
lem. The CMS/HCFA data indicated an increase in citations for deficien-
cies related to abuse between 1988 and 2000. Although the data show an
increase in citations for abuse, the increase has been seen in deficiencies
related to facility processes rather than to actual, documented abuse of
residents. Four deficiencies, listed below, are related to abuse. Only one
(F223) is cited when there is a substantiated incident of abuse.

     • F223 is cited when a facility fails to protect its residents from
abuse;
     • F224 is cited when a facility fails to write and use policies that
forbid mistreatment, neglect, abuse, and theft of resident’s property;
     • F225 is cited when a facility fails to hire employees without histo-
ries of abusive behaviors or fails to report and investigate allegations of
abuse;
     • F226 is cited when a facility fails to implement the policies it writes
to forbid mistreatment, neglect, abuse, and misappropriation.

     Changes in the rates of these deficiencies across the first quarters of
1998, 1999, and 2000 are displayed in Figure 14-1. These rates represent
the proportion of facilities that were cited for resident abuse. In 1999, for
example, 326 facilities were cited for F223, the deficiency representing
substantiated cases of abuse. However, it is important to note that these
probably represent minimal estimates of abuse because, as discussed below,
very few allegations are substantiated. Furthermore, even among substan-
tiated cases of abuse and neglect, relatively few result in a deficiency cita-
tion (Hawes et al., 2001).
     In addition to increases in substantiated cases of abuse for which defi-
ciencies are cited, there have been significant increases in citations for fail-
ure to hire persons without a history of abusive behaviors or to adequately
investigate and report allegations of abuse.
     These reported increases are more serious than the data suggest for two
main reasons. First, as discussed later, most cases are not substantiated,
often for reasons having little to do with the likely truth of the allegation.
Second, as also discussed later, even when abuse allegations are substanti-
ated, there is rarely a deficiency citation against the facility that would be
recorded as an “F-Tag.” Third, in most states the agencies responsible for
investigating abuse and neglect in nursing homes acknowledge their depen-
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                                  459

14%

12%
                                                                                 F223
10%
                                                                                 F224
 8%

 6%                                                                              F225

 4%
                                                                                 F226
 2%

 0%
          1st Qtr 1988           1st Qtr 1999             1st Qtr 2000

FIGURE 14-1      Rates of deficiency citations for abuse, 1988–2000.


dence on such reports from facilities, as illustrated by the following quote
from a state official responsible for state investigations of abuse and ne-
glect:

      We are struggling with [the] responsibility to do our investigations and
      how reliant we are on facility investigations. . . . [W]e would need more
      staff to do all investigations. To do an on-site investigation to verify a
      facility’s investigation takes us a day. To do an investigation from scratch
      would take us three days.
                             Nurse Aide Registry Director (Hawes et al., 2001)


     Indeed, the bulk of the allegations of abuse in most states start with
reports filed by facilities (Hawes et al., 2001). Some agencies reported
concern that facilities may fail to report cases, simply discharging the CNA
in question. If this view is correct and some facilities are failing to report
allegations or to investigate them adequately, there may be large numbers
of unreported cases of resident abuse or neglect.


U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Government Reform
    Recently, the Minority Staff of the Special Investigations Division of
the House Committee on Government Reform issued a report asserting that
abuse of residents “is a major problem in U.S. nursing homes” (U.S. House
of Representatives, 2001). This report analyzed data from the OSCAR
system and the nursing home complaint database covering all surveys and
complaint investigations during a 2-year period (i.e., January 1999 through
460                                                            ELDER MISTREATMENT

January 2000) and included all four of the deficiency codes related to abuse
(F223, 224, 225, and 226). The report concluded:

    • During the 2-year period, nearly one-third of all certified facilities
had been cited for some type of abuse violation that had the potential to
cause harm or had actually caused harm to a nursing home resident.
    • Ten percent of the nursing homes in the United States were cited
for abuse violations that caused actual harm to residents or placed them in
immediate jeopardy of death or serious injury.
    • The percentage of homes with abuse violations has been increasing,
probably as a result, at least in part, of more stringent reporting require-
ments and increased vulnerability among residents.
    • The cases involving abuse included physical and sexual abuse as
well as verbal abuse involving threats and humiliation.


                     Reports from the Nurse Aide Registries
     One potential source of data on abuse in nursing homes is the nurse
aide registries. Under federal law, states were required to establish a nurse
aide registry and investigate any complaints of abuse, neglect, and misap-
propriation of resident property by any nurse aide in a nursing home that
participates in the Medicare or Medicaid program.9 The law provided that
“if a state found that a nurse aide had neglected or abused a nursing facility
resident or misappropriated property of a resident, then the state must have
such information included in the state’s nurse aide registry” and the aide
would be barred from nursing home employment.10 In addition, under
federal regulations, states were obligated to determine whether facility prac-
tices or policies caused or contributed to the substantiated abuse, neglect,
or misappropriation.
     In a recent study for CMS (formerly HCFA), researchers surveyed the
state agencies administering the nurse aide registries (Hawes et al., 2001).
Forty of the 51 agencies responded, but those agencies varied widely in
their ability to provide data and in the operation of their systems, from
intake to investigation and resolution. Nevertheless, some of the results
were instructive about the prevalence of abuse and neglect. For example,
only 14 states provided a detailed breakdown of the types of complaints or
allegations they received. However, for the vast majority (79 percent) of
those states that provided a breakdown of cases by type, more than 70


  9Sections 1819 (e) (2) (A) and 1919 (e) (2) (A) of the Social Security Act.
  1042 CFR Ch. IV (10-1-98 Edition) §483.156 (a) (5) (c) (iv) (D). The lifetime ban was
modified in certain cases under provisions of the 1997 Balanced Budged Act.
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                      461

            TABLE 14-3 Rates of Allegations per 1,000
            Nursing Facility Beds
                                                     Number
            Rate                                     of States

            1 to 6.99 per 1,000 beds                 4
            7 to 9.99 per 1,000 beds                 3
            10 to 19.99 per 1,000 beds               5
            20 to 29.99 per 1,000 beds               3
            >30 per 1,000 beds                       5

            Total states reporting = 20 of 41 surveyed.
            SOURCE: Hawes et al. (2001).




percent of the cases involved allegations of abuse. Fewer than 20 percent of
the cases involved neglect, and less than 10 percent of the reported allega-
tions involved misappropriation.
     States also varied in the rate of complaints they received. Because of
very limited data systems, only about half of the participating states could
provide statistics on the total number of allegations broken out by cat-
egory—abuse, neglect, or misappropriation. As displayed in Table 14-3,
there was tremendous variation in the rate of reported complaints across
the states. The reported number of complaints or allegations of abuse,
neglect, and misappropriation that were logged into the nurse aide registry
system varied from 1 per 1,000 nursing home beds to 174 per 1,000 beds
across the states that reported these statistics. It is important to note that
this finding is very similar to that reported by the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, OIG (1998), which also found widespread
variability between states in reported rates. The OIG found that in the
states it examined, the rates of abuse complaints varied from less than 1
percent to more than 17 percent of the state’s nursing home population.
     Because of this variability and because most states were unable to break
out complaints by type, it is difficult to estimate the underlying prevalence
of complaints about abuse. The modal rate of complaints is between 10
and 20 complaints per 1000 beds. If this rate were applied to the 1.8
million beds nationwide, that would suggest a nationwide average of 18,000
to 36,000 complaints per year. If 70 percent of these were about abuse,
then the estimate would be 12,600 to 25,200 abuse complaints annually.
Of course, there is no way to discern what the underlying rate would be if
all states had effective outreach and reporting systems and inclusive defini-
tions of abuse and neglect. For example, in a state with a model education
462                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

and outreach program, the rate was 54 complaints per 1,000 beds.11,12 If
that state’s rate were applied nationwide, there would be 97,200 com-
plaints, with more than 54,000 complaints about abuse.


                     Prevalence of Neglect in Nursing Homes

      I have seen my roommate left lying in the bed for more than one hour
      with her behind exposed. I feel sorry for my roommate. They treat her so
      bad. She can’t talk or walk.
                                             Georgia Nursing Home Resident
                         (Atlanta Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program, 2000)
     Neglect is more difficult than abuse to identify and thus to quantify.
Neglect is typically thought of as “the failure by the responsible caretaker
to provide services to maintain [the elder’s] physical and mental health”
(Lachs et al., 1997). The federal definition, as applied to the nurse aide
registry, is “failure to provide goods and services necessary to avoid physi-
cal harm, mental anguish, or mental illness.” The Washington state survey
agency branch that manages the nurse aide registry distinguishes between
two types of neglect. One type is represented by the failure to provide
needed assistance and services. A second type occurs when a CNA per-
forms a task inappropriately, such as doing a one-person transfer when a
resident actually requires a two-person transfer for safety or when a CNA
does a task for which he or she is not qualified and not supervised (e.g.,
performing a procedure that should be done by a licensed nurse). While the
second type of neglect is distinct, the first is difficult to separate from a
more general quality of care problem rooted in broader facility practices
and policies rather than in the circumscribed action of one individual staff
member.
     Sadly, there is considerable evidence of the “failure to provide goods
and services necessary to avoid physical harm, mental anguish, or mental
illness” in the nation’s nursing homes.



   11In this state with a model program, a much higher proportion of complaints addressed
issues related to neglect (e.g., 56 percent were about abuse in this state, versus a national
average of 70 percent; 38 percent were about neglect). In addition, most of the complaints in
this model state were about verbal or psychological abuse rather than physical abuse, unlike
other states.
   12One state with a relatively low rate noted that it had instituted fingerprinting as part of
the criminal background check for applicants for the CNA position. The state agency re-
ported that the number of people rejected had quadrupled as a result of the greater accuracy
of the background checks and that this might account for the drop in complaints the state
experienced recently.
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                      463

Resident and Family Reports of Neglect
     Ninety-five percent of the residents who were interviewed as part of the
Atlanta Long-Term Care Ombudsman study reported that they had experi-
enced neglect or witnessed other residents being neglected (Atlanta Long-
Term Care Ombudsman Program, 2000). The kinds of things they re-
ported included residents being left wet or soiled with feces; not being
turned and positioned, which can lead to pressure ulcers; shutting off call
lights without helping the resident seeking assistance; not receiving enough
help at mealtimes; and residents who needed help with eating and drinking
or not getting enough to eat or drink. In focus group interviews, families
also discussed instances of neglect, including residents who needed help
with eating not receiving it and dying of malnutrition and dehydration,
residents being put in tubs of water that were too hot and being scalded,
and residents being left for hours or even days in wet and soiled clothing
and bedding. They also reported incidents in which pressure ulcers were
improperly treated, leading to sepsis and death.


CNA Reports of Neglect
     In focus group interviews, CNAs reported that neglect was not un-
usual. They reported that in times of shortstaffing, neglect of range of
motion exercises to prevent contractures, failure to turn and reposition to
prevent development of pressure ulcers, neglect of residents’ hydration needs
(e.g., not taking them fresh water or not reminding cognitively impaired
residents to drink), and giving residents too little help with eating were the
most common areas of neglect (Hawes et al., 2001). In a survey of CNAs
preparing to go through a special training session aimed at preventing
abuse and neglect, 37 percent of the CNAs reported they had seen neglect
of a resident’s care needs (MacDonald, 2000).


Ombudsman Reports
    The 1998 compilation of complaints received by the state Long-Term
Care Ombudsman program reported that 27 percent of the complaints
ombudsmen received had to do with the types of inadequate care that are
typically thought of as neglect (e.g., improper handling, accidents, neglected
personal hygiene, and unheeded requests for assistance) (Administration on
Aging, 2000). Further, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices, OIG (1999a) found that ombudsman complaints about quality of
care have also been increasing in recent years.
464                                                            ELDER MISTREATMENT

Survey Deficiencies
    The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, OIG (1999a)
found an increase in the frequency with which deficiencies were cited for
neglect and poor quality-of-care. In recent years, deficiency citations in-
creased in 13 of 25 quality of care areas, including such problems as im-
proper care for pressure ulcers, inadequate care to maximize physical func-
tioning in activities of daily living (ADL), and lack of adequate supervision
to prevent accidents.


Research Studies
     Other studies have raised similar concerns. For example, in a detailed
review of records of a sample of residents who died in California nursing
homes, U.S. General Accounting Office (1999a) found that more than half
had received unacceptable care, including lack of appropriate attention to
dramatic, unplanned weight loss, failure to properly treat pressure ulcers,
and failure to manage pain. This was a follow-up to a review of deaths
from 1986 to 1993 in California nursing homes by an attorney who argued
that 7 percent of all residents died as a result of severe neglect (Thompson,
1997). A review of records and care practices in 14 facilities in 11 states,
conducted with protocols similar to the GAO’s, documented inadequate
treatment in one-third of the facilities in the areas of nutritional support,
pressure ulcer care, prevention of contractures, pain management, and per-
sonal assistance (Johnson and Kramer, 1998). Other studies and hearings
by the U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging have documented similar
problems (Bernabei et al., 1998; Blaum et al., 1995; Fries et al., 1997;
Hawes et al., 1997; Hawes, 1997; Kayser-Jones, 1997; Phillips et al., 1997).
For example, Blaum and her colleagues (1995) found that a major predictor
of unintended weight loss and low body-mass index among nursing home
residents was that a resident needed help with eating. Similarly, Kayser-
Jones and Schell (1997) found that many facilities were so understaffed that
even though trays were taken into rooms, residents were not fed.


      EVIDENCE ABOUT THE NATURE AND PREVALENCE OF
      ABUSE AND NEGLECT IN RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES
   There are no federal standards that govern residential care facilities,
which are known by more than 30 different names across the country.13


  13Those names include personal care homes, adult care homes, adult congregate living
facilities, residential care homes for the elderly, shelter care homes, homes for the aged,
domiciliary care homes, board and care homes, and assisted living facilities.
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                      465

As a result, there are no national databases containing information on
deficiencies. Thus, it is even more difficult than with nursing homes to
generate anything approaching estimates of the prevalence or nature of
abuse of neglect. This section of the paper briefly reviews what is known
about these types of facilities and issues related to abuse and neglect.


                   What Are Residential Care Facilities?
     Other than nursing homes, the most common form of residential set-
tings with services for people with disabilities are generically known as
board and care homes, or residential care facilities (RCFs). These terms
describe a variety of settings; however, in general they refer to nonmedical
community-based residential settings that house two or more unrelated
adults and provide some services such as meals, medication supervision or
reminders, organized activities, transportation, and help with bathing, dress-
ing, and other activities of daily living (ADL). RCFs are known by more
than 30 different names, including adult congregate care, personal care
homes, homes for the aged, adult care homes, and group homes. In addi-
tion, many states have expanded the category of RCFs to include a specific
classification known as assisted living (Mollica, 1998).
     There are three basic types of RCFs: (1) group homes serving a clien-
tele with mental retardation or developmental disabilities (MR/DD); (2)
homes serving persons with mental illness; and (3) homes serving a mixed
population of physically frail elderly, cognitively impaired elderly, and per-
sons with mental health problems. All but 7,000 facilities are in the last
category and are the focus of our initiative. They serve a mainly elderly
population, although many house a mixed population of frail elderly and
residents who have some type of psychiatric condition. In the early 1990s,
there were an estimated 46,000 licensed and unlicensed RCFs with more
than 700,000 beds (Clark et al., 1994; Hawes et al., 1993; Hawes et al.,
1995a). The rapid growth since then of assisted living facilities has prob-
ably increased the total number of all types of residential care facilities to
more than 50,000 facilities with more than 1 million beds (Hawes, et al.,
1999; Assisted Living Federation of America, 1998; American Seniors Hous-
ing Association, 1998). As a point of comparison, there are an estimated
16,700 licensed nursing homes with approximately 1.8 million beds serving
more than 1.5 million residents (Strahan, 1997). Thus, RCFs are a signifi-
cant care setting for persons with chronic illness and disability.


                Risk Factors: Vulnerability of Consumers
    Consumers in RCFs face a number of daunting challenges to protecting
their interests and securing adequate health care. Indeed, many RCF resi-
466                                                           ELDER MISTREATMENT

TABLE 14-4 RCF Resident Characteristics
                                                 ASPE,         NC,          Maine,
RCF Resident Characteristic                      1993a         1994b        1999 c

Female                                            66%          66%          67%
White                                             91%          71%          98%
Black/African American                             7%          29%          —
Aged 85+                                          34%          24%          33%
Average age                                       75           —            77
Currently married                                 13%           8%           8%
Mental retardation/DD                             11%          23%          11%
Self-report mental, emotional or                  33%          51%          42% (with
  nervous condition                                                         diagnosis)
Moderate to severe cognitive impairment           40%          64%          44%
Received help with 1 to 2 ADLs                    21%          21%          32%
Received help with 3+ ADLs                        10%          20%          19%
Urinary incontinence                              23%          39%          37%
Any behavioral symptom (e.g., wandering,
  physical aggression)                            —            29%          31%
Received any psychotropic medication              41%          —            40%
Medicaid or SSI eligible                          34%          71%          18%

   aThe Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evalaution (ASPE) 1993 study is
based on a random sample of residents in 10 states (Hawes et al., 1995a and b).
   bThe 1994 North Carolina study is based on a probability sample of residents
statewide (Hawes et al., 1995c).
   c The Maine data are from the resident universe (Fralich et al., 1997).




dents exhibit the characteristics that place elders at risk of abuse and ne-
glect in other settings. First, RCFs house a population with chronic disease
and significant disabilities, as shown in Table 14-4 (Fralich et al., 1997;
Hawes et al., 1995a, 1995b, 1995c, 2000). In particular, residents exhibit
relatively high levels of cognitive impairment or another mental health
condition, with the exception of residents in relatively high-level assisted
living facilities (Phillips et al., 2000). Moreover, the average age of resi-
dents and their level of functional and cognitive impairment have increased
significantly over the last decade (Hawes et al., 1995a). Several studies
confirm these findings of significant chronic disease and disability, includ-
ing significant levels of cognitive impairment and behavioral symptoms,
which place them at high risk for abuse and neglect (Fralich et al., 1997;
Hawes et al., 1995a, b, c; Hodlewsky, 1998; Kane et al., 1991; National
Investment Center Conference, 1998).
     A second factor that places RCF residents at risk for abuse and neglect
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                                    467

is that they experience considerable social isolation. Several studies found
that 83 to 85 percent were unmarried, and one-quarter of the residents had
no living children (Fralich et al., 1997; Hawes et al., 1995a, b, c; Phillips et
al., 2000). In one study conducted in the mid-1990s, the research found
that one-third of 3,200 residents in 10 states reported they had not left the
facility in the preceding 14 days; 19 percent reported no visits with family
or friends in the preceding 30 days; and 24 percent had visited with friends
or family only one or two times in the preceding 30 days (Hawes et al.,
1995b). Similarly, in a 1998 survey of a national probability sample of
residents in assisted living facilities that offered high services or high pri-
vacy, 9 percent reported no visit with family or friends in last 30 days, and
27 percent had visited with friends or family only once or twice in the last
30 days (Hawes et al., 2000). Thus, many residents lacked close family or
friends who could be their advocates. In addition, ombudsmen programs
that help fill this gap in nursing homes are largely absent in RCF settings,
their activities mainly limited to complaint investigation (Phillips et al.,
1994). Also, one study interviewed staff and residents and found that most
residents and staff were ignorant of the ombudsman program (Hawes et al.,
1995a).
     Third, many RCF residents have additional characteristics that have
been associated with disparities between services and unmet health care
needs. Many of these have been identified as risk factors for abuse or
neglect in other settings. Although estimates vary across states and types of
residential care facilities, an estimated one-third of residents are poor—
their care paid for by a combination of Supplemental Security Income (SSI),
state supplemental payments, and Medicaid (Hawes et al., 1995a, b, c;
Fralich et al., 1997). The majority of residents in traditional RCFs (outside
of higher-priced assisted living facilities) would be classified as poor or
near-poor (i.e., income less than 200 percent of poverty). Furthermore,
about one-third of all residents have mental retardation, developmental
disabilities, or persistent, severe mental illness (Fralich et al., 1997; Hawes
et al., 1995a, b, c; Mor et al., 1986). As an example of disparities associ-
ated with these characteristics, one 10-state study14 that included a random
sample of residents found that residents with SSI as a payor were twice as
likely as other residents to have unmet need for assistive devices (Hawes et
al., 1995c).




  14The 10 states were selected based on whether they had extensive or limited regulatory
systems. Facilities were selected on a stratified, random basis, and residents were randomly
selected within the study facilities.
468                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

              Evidence of Abuse in Residential Care Facilities
     Unfortunately, there are no published quantitative studies of abuse in
residential care facilities, and there have not even been published qualitative
studies, such as focus groups, that addressed issues of abuse. The 10-state
study described above interviewed staff members in RCFs using the items
developed by Pillemer and Moore (1989); however, rather than interview-
ing staff by telephone, these were in-person interviews. Fifteen percent of
the staff reported witnessing other staff engage in verbal abuse (e.g., threats,
cursing, yelling) or forms of punishment, such as withholding food, exces-
sive use of physical restraints, or isolating difficult residents (Hawes et al.,
1995b).
     The only other available estimates of abuse or neglect in RCFs are from
the LTC ombudsman program and the NORS data. However, the ombuds-
man presence in residential care facilities is much more limited than in
nursing homes (Phillips et al., 1994). For example, ombudsmen handled
121,686 cases in FY 1998, but 82 percent of those cases were in nursing
home settings; only 17 percent were residents in residential care facilities.
However, of the cases handled by ombudsmen in residential care facilities
and reported in NORS, physical abuse was one of the top five complaints
registered with the ombudsman program (Administration on Aging, 2000).

                       Neglect and Quality Concerns
     The vulnerability of consumers is particularly troubling because of
long-standing concerns about quality in RCFs and residents’ access to
needed health care services. As noted above in the section on defining
neglect, it is difficult to define neglect and separate it from poor quality, in
general. Moreover, relatively few studies have focused on quality in resi-
dential care, and most of those concentrated on medication errors and
overuse of psychotropics. Thus, there is only relatively limited evidence
available about neglect in residential care facilities.
     Several studies throughout the 1980s suggested that RCF residents
were not receiving adequate care or were being neglected. Such findings
included unsafe and unsanitary conditions, widespread use of psychotropic
drugs suggesting some level of chemical restraints, lack of staff knowledge
about medication administration, and other problems (Avorn et al., 1989;
Budden, 1985; Hartzema et al., 1986; Mor et al., 1986; U.S. General Ac-
counting Office, 1992a, b; U.S. House of Representatives, Select Commit-
tee on Aging, 1989).
     These concerns were heightened in the 1990s because of the increas-
ingly complex health care needs of residents and continued reports of qual-
ity problems (Hawes et al., 1995a). These problems included medication
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                                       469

                TABLE 14-5 Resident Reports of Unmet Care
                Needs in RCFs Known as Assisted Living
                Unmet Need           Percent               Standard Error

                Dressing             12                     2.89
                Locomotion           12                     3.29
                Toileting            26                    12.07
                Eating               0.0                    0.0

                Data for only those residents who received some help with
                that ADL.
                SOURCE: Phillips et al. (2000).




errors, high rates of psychotropic drug use, poor management of behavioral
symptoms among residents with Alzheimer’s disease or other dementias,
including inappropriate use of physical restraints, and poorer functional
outcomes for RCF residents compared to nursing home residents, which
suggested neglect of care needs (Baldwin, 1992; Bates, 1997; Spore et al.,
1995, 1996, 1997a, b; Stark et al., 1995; U.S. General Accounting Office,
1992a). In addition one study asked a national probability sample of
assisted living residents who could respond about whether they had unmet
care needs (Phillips et al., 2000).15 As shown in Table 14-5, among those
residents who needed assistance with various ADLs, some residents did
report needing more help than they received (e.g., had to wait so long for
help with toileting that they wet or soiled themselves).
     These findings are troubling, because state policymakers wish to ex-
pand the role of RCFs (Mollica, 1998). States have been permitting higher
levels of acuity (e.g., admission or retention of residents who are bedfast,
chairfast, or use wheelchairs), and many have begun allowing provision of
daily or intermittent nursing care, skilled home care, and hospice care in
RCFs (Hawes et al., 1993; Kane and Wilson, 1993; Manard, et al., 1992;
Mollica, 1998).


 LIMITATIONS OF ESTIMATES OF PREVALENCE OF ABUSE AND
         NEGLECT IN LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS
    The results of these studies suggest that abuse and neglect are wide-
spread across residential long-term care settings. However, there is no


  15This was a national probability sample of residents in ALFs that, relative to the general
population of places calling themselves “assisted living,” provided either high services or high
privacy.
470                                                      ELDER MISTREATMENT

definitive evidence about prevalence. There are several reasons for this.
First, existing estimates are based on reports to a multiplicity of agencies,
each of which uses different definitions, investigative protocols, and stan-
dards of proof. Second, research and well-established protocols are needed
to distinguish incidents involving abuse and neglect from the natural conse-
quences of multiple chronic diseases and disabilities experienced by long-
term care residents. Third, there is significant underreporting by health
care professionals, residents and families, and the official mechanisms for
receiving formal complaints of abuse and neglect are deeply flawed.


            Multiple Reporting Agencies and Differing Definitions

      The chief impediment to rigorous epidemiologic research has been widely
      differing definitions of abuse.
                                               Lachs and Pillemer (1995:437)
     There are multiple agencies with some responsibility for investigating
cases of abuse or neglect (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
OIG, 1998, 1999b; Tatara, 1990; Hawes et al., 2001). For residents in
nursing homes and residential care facilities, those agencies differ across
states but typically include ombudsmen, adult protective services, the state
survey agency responsible for licensing nursing homes, the state agency
responsible for the operation of the nurse aide registry, Medicaid fraud
units in the attorney general’s office, and professional licensing boards,
such as the Board of Nursing or Boards of Nursing Home Administrators.
     As a result, the data from one agency, such as the ombudsmen, should
not be taken as an indicator of the amount of abuse, because “many abuse
complaints are reported to other state agencies, not to the ombudsman
program” (Administration on Aging, 2000). In addition, the existence of
multiple reporting agencies means that data on the prevalence of abuse are
often incomplete, generated using different definitions and methods of data
collection (Baron and Wellty, 1996). In practice, reporting individuals and
agencies use different definitions and have different standards and practices
for the timing and nature of investigations and for classifying an allegation
as substantiated (Hawes et al., 2001; Huber et al., 2001; U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, OIG, 1999b). For example, some of the
reporting agencies, such as the Boards of Nursing, use different definitions
of abuse, excluding anything that would be classified as verbal or psycho-
logical abuse, such as threats or yelling at a resident in anger (Hawes et al.,
2001). Similarly, in general, ombudsmen are not held to a standard of
beyond a reasonable doubt (Huber et al., 2001). However, in most states,
the investigations of abuse by the nurse aide registries do adhere to the
standard of beyond a reasonable doubt (Hawes et al., 2001).
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                         471

     Finally, even within the two systems that maintain a national database
on abuse and neglect in nursing homes—the NORS used by ombudsmen
and the Online Survey Certification and Reporting System (OSCAR) used
by state survey agencies—there are variations across states in the defini-
tions, standards of proof, and rates of substantiation they use, despite
having uniform requirements (Administration on Aging, 2000; Hawes et
al., 2001; Huber et al., 2001; U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, OIG, 1991, 1999b).


     Difficulty Detecting and Distinguishing Abuse and Neglect from
               Effects of Chronic Disease Among the Aging
     One of the factors that complicates the task of generating accurate
estimates of the prevalence of abuse and neglect is that it is often difficult to
distinguish abuse from the effects of the chronic diseases found among
many elderly, particularly those at risk for abuse and neglect because of
their functional limitations. Signs that may indicate abuse or neglect tend
to be attributed to either the normal processes of aging or to the chronic
diseases and disabilities experienced by many frail elders (Wolf, 1988). The
fact that some injuries thought of as potential markers for abuse may be a
product of medical conditions (e.g., spontaneous fractures of the long bones
among nursing home residents who were non-weight-bearing) makes the
issue singularly complex (Kane and Goodwin, 1991). This problem is
accentuated by the lack of care some physicians take when examining
elderly residents admitted to hospitals or emergency rooms from nursing
homes or residential care facilities and investigating and documenting their
injuries. For example, one study examined charts of all elderly nursing
home residents admitted to a Level I trauma center for an injury during
1997. The study found that 47 percent of cases reviewed had inadequate
documentation to differentiate accidental trauma from abuse or neglect
(Barlow et al., 1998).


                         Widespread Underreporting
    As noted earlier, reporting of suspected cases of elder abuse is required
in most states under mandatory elder abuse reporting laws; moreover, it is
required in all states if it occurs in nursing homes under the provisions
governing the Nurse Aide Registry (Hawes et al., 2001; Morris, 1998;
Steigel, 1995). Despite this, there is general agreement that there is signifi-
cant underreporting of cases of suspected elder abuse (Administration on
Aging, 2000; American Medical Association, 1992; Atlanta Long-Term
Care Ombudsman Program, 2000; Bowers et al., 2001; Pillemer and
Finkelhor, 1988). Indeed, most authorities acknowledge that incidents of
472                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

abuse are underreported, both by mandated “reporters,” such as physicians
and nurses, and by residents and families (Kleinschmidt et al., 1997; U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, OIG, 1990a; Pettee, 1997;
Pillemer and Finkelhor, 1988;Tatara, 1990).16



Underreporting by Health Care Professionals
     There have been relatively few studies of elder abuse, compared to child
abuse (Kleinschmidt et al., 1997; Lachs and Pillemer, 1995). However,
there is some evidence that physicians rarely or never report suspected cases
of elder abuse involving nursing home residents (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, OIG, 1990b). Other studies have had similar findings
with regard to staff in hospitals. Several studies have found that hospital
and emergency department (ED) personnel, such as physicians and nurses,
were often unfamiliar with mandatory elder abuse reporting laws (Blakely
and Dolon, 1991; Clark-Daniels et al., 1990; Wolf, 1988). In addition, one
study found that only 27 percent of emergency physicians had established
protocols for identifying and addressing suspected cases of elder abuse
(MacNamara et al., 1992). Furthermore, relatively few cases of elder abuse
are reported to authorities (Pillemer and Finkelhor, 1988). The same is true
for other health care professionals who are in a position to detect abuse and
neglect.
     A study of emergency department (ED) nurses in Florida found that 83
percent reported seeing what they thought was evidence of abuse of older
persons admitted to an emergency room for treatment, but only 36 percent
had reported abuse (Reynolds and Stanton, 1983). Two more recent stud-
ies demonstrated similar findings, as displayed in Table 14-6. The studies
reported on interviews with ED nurses, home health agency nurses, and
nurses who worked in acute care (i.e., medical or surgical units) or a long-
term psychiatric facility. As shown, most nurses reported observing abuse,
including instances of severe injuries, such as skull fractures, sexual assault,
bites, and severe bruising (Pettee, 1997). Yet in both studies, there was a
significant discrepancy between the proportion of nurses who had observed
suspected abuse and those who had reported it (e.g., 73 percent reportedly
observed abuse but only 36 percent had reported it). In addition, both


   16One report, however, suggested that aside from nursing home employees, hospital staff
were the most likely to report abuse to an ombudsman program (Watson et al., 1993). On
the other hand, as noted earlier in this paper, another study found that documentation of
injuries occurring among elderly nursing home residents was inadequate to differentiate acci-
dental trauma from abuse or neglect in 47 percent of the 328 cases reviewed (Barlow et al.,
1998).
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                          473

         TABLE 14-6 Nurse Observation and Reporting
                                                  Indiana      Michigan
                                                  Nurses       Nurses
         Topic                                    (percent)a   (percent)b

         Abuse Observed                           73           60
         Type of Abuse Observed
         Physical                                 22           32
         Psychological                            10           29
         Neglect                                  39           37
         Abuse Reported                           36           34
         Nurse Knowledge Of...
         Laws on elder abuse                      41           34
         Mandatory reporting law                  57           85
         APS                                      72           50
         Immunity                                 33           23

           a Nurses (n = 83) in ED and home health agencies.
           bNurses (n = 90) in acute care (medical and surgical units) and
         long-term psychiatric facility.
         SOURCE: Adapted from Pettee (1997).




studies found that the majority of nurses (59 percent and 66 percent, re-
spectively) were unaware of laws on elder abuse, and a surprising number
of nurses (43 percent) working in EDs or home health were unaware of
state mandatory reporting requirements.

Underreporting by Residents and Family Members
     There is also evidence from surveys and focus group interviews of
underreporting by residents and family members (Atlanta Long-Term Care
Ombudsman Program, 2000; Bowers et al., 2001; Hawes et al., 2001;
Pettee, 1997). In focus group interviews, surveys, and individual inter-
views, some residents and family members expressed a general reluctance to
complain, evidently feeling that there were other mechanisms for resolving
problems, such as working through the resident and family councils or
speaking with the administrator. Others feared that a formal complaint
might generate retaliation by the facility against the resident. For example,
in a recent survey by the Atlanta ombudsman program, 44 percent of the
residents who had seen abuse of other residents did not report it. Half (50
percent) did not tell because they feared retaliation (Atlanta Long-Term
Care Ombudsman Program, 2000). Other residents and family members
did not file formal complaints because they felt the process was futile. For
example, in the study by the Atlanta ombudsmen, 38 percent of the resi-
474                                                       ELDER MISTREATMENT

dents said reporting “wouldn’t do any good” (Atlanta Long-Term Care
Ombudsman Program, 2000). Finally, some families reported that they did
not file formal complaints in some cases because all their energy was di-
rected at getting adequate medical care for their loved one who had been
abused, moving them to the hospital, and then finding a new nursing home
for the resident following acute care discharge (Bowers et al., 2001).


Underreporting by Ombudsmen
    There is also some underreporting of complaints by ombudsmen (Ad-
ministration on Aging, 2000; Tatara, 1990). For example, some residents
and family members do not consent to having a formal complaint filed. In
addition, in a recent survey, one-third of the ombudsmen (36 percent)
reported that they viewed their role as resolving complaints with the facility
and filing a complaint only if unable to resolve the complaint. Another four
percent reported that they would resolve problems between the resident or
family and facility without ever filing a complaint (Hawes and Blevins,
2001).


Unreliable Reporting by the Nurse Aide Registries
     There is considerable disagreement among the directors of the state
nurse aide registries about whether there is overreporting or underreporting
of complaints about abuse and neglect, as displayed in Figure 14-2. The
situation is complicated by at least two factors. First, facilities are obligated
by federal regulation to investigate and report incidents alleged to involve
abuse, neglect, or misappropriation. Some respondents felt this encouraged
some facilities to report even incidents that were not abuse or neglect just to
ensure that they were in compliance with federal regulations. Other re-
spondents felt that some facilities simply discharged CNAs involved in
incidents or allowed them to resign, thus terminating any investigation or
reporting process. Only 39 percent of the state nurse aide registry directors
felt that facilities reported allegations of abuse or neglect “all of the time”
(Hawes et al., 2001). Second, it was clear that differing concepts of the
nature of abuse led some respondents to label reports of verbal or psycho-
logical abuse as overreporting, as illustrated by the following quote from on
agency’s director/program manager.

      Oh, there is just tremendous overreporting. You know, things like yelling
      at or threatening a resident. That’s not really abuse, and we don’t count
      it.
                                   Aide Registry Director (Hawes et al., 2001)
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                           475

                   Under-
                  reporting
                     33%                                   Don't
                                                           Know
                                                            15%




                                                            Over-
                                                          reporting
                                                             52%


FIGURE 14-2 Agencies’ views on the rate of allegations.
SOURCE: Hawes et al. (2001).


      There is also reason to believe that data from the nurse aide registries
represent an underestimate based on the historically low rates at which
these agencies substantiate allegations of abuse and neglect. As reported by
the nurse aide registries, the substantiation rates for allegations of abuse
and neglect ranged from a low of zero (i.e., no allegations substantiated) to
a reported high of 98 percent, although the norm appeared to be a substan-
tiation rate of about one-third for all allegations of abuse or neglect. Fewer
than one in five of the state agencies (18 percent) had substantiation rates
above 60 percent. About half of the state agencies (47 percent ) reported
substantiation rates of 20 to 39 percent, while slightly more than one-third
of the agencies (35 percent) had rates between zero and 19 percent (Hawes
et al., 2001).
      There are several reasons for such low substantiation rates. First, in
some states considerable time elapsed between the time the alleged incident
occurred and the formal investigation by the state nurse aide registry. Sec-
ond, if the only witnesses were the alleged perpetrator and the victim, most
state registries closed the case, classifying it as either insufficient evidence or
unsubstantiated. Many nurse aide registry respondents reported being un-
comfortable with this decision to essentially drop cases that were based
only on the word of a resident. They attributed this decision to the fact that
the penalty for a CNA found to have committed abuse was being barred for
life from nursing home employment. Thus, the states felt they were held to
such a high burden of proof in these cases (e.g., beyond a reasonable
doubt)—or would be held to such a standard if the case were appealed to an
476                                                          ELDER MISTREATMENT

administrative law judge—that they would not accept cases they viewed as
being essentially “he said/she said.” Third, if the facility were unable (or
unwilling) to identify the alleged perpetrator of abuse, some states would
close the case, classifying the injury as “an incident of unknown origin” and
the case as unsubstantiated, as illustrated below in a case reported by the
adult child of a resident.

      The DON called me and said my mother had waked up with a bump, a
      red bump, on her forehead. When I got to the facility that morning, I
      found her horribly bruised on her face and [the backs of her] forearms, as
      you can see in the photograph. She looked as if someone had gone seven
      rounds with her, except she has advanced Parkinson’s. The only move-
      ment she can make is to raise her arms like this [indicating she could raise
      them defensively in front of her face]. The facility said she must have
      gotten them [the bruises and contusions] falling against her bedrails, but
      she can’t move independently in bed. . . . So then they said they didn’t
      know how it happened. When I called the state’s toll-free number [for the
      abuse hotline], I was told they couldn’t do anything if the facility couldn’t
      identify the perpetrator. . . . Did anyone suggest I call the police? No, no
      one.
                         Daughter of a resident, speaking in a focus group with
                                    other family members (Hawes et al., 2001)
     Finally, there is some evidence to suggest that if the nursing home
terminated the employment of the alleged perpetrator or if the CNA in
question quit after an alleged incident, the case was closed. However, it
appears that some such cases never appear as substantiated nor is the CNA
in question ever listed on the registry as barred from nursing home employ-
ment (Hawes et al., 2001).
     As a result of these factors, the actual number of abuse and neglect
cases reported by the nurse aide registries as substantiated is quite small
relative to the number of allegations received. In focus group interviews,
the directors of the state survey agencies that had overall administrative
authority for the nurse aide registries expressed concern about the relatively
low rates of substantiation, particularly because most tended to believe that
residents and families complained only when something significant had
occurred.


Underreporting in the OSCAR Database
    The surveys of the state nurse aide registries also suggest that the defi-
ciency data on abuse in OSCAR represent an underestimate of the preva-
lence of abuse cases. Even when cases of abuse or neglect were substanti-
ated, most states did not cite the facility for a sanction. Indeed, four-fifths
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                       477

of the states (63 percent) that could provide data on deficiency citations
reported that they cited a deficiency in fewer than 10 percent of the sub-
stantiated cases (Hawes et al., 2001).


  RESEARCH CHALLENGES ASSOCIATED WITH DETERMINING
   THE PREVALENCE OF ABUSE AND NEGLECT IN NURSING
        HOMES AND RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES
     The preceding sections were intended to show that abuse and neglect
are apparently widespread and serious problems in long-term care settings.
Millions of elderly are at risk over the course of their lives, and this popu-
lation at risk will increase, given current demographic trends. Despite this,
there is no conclusive evidence about the prevalence of abuse and neglect.
Determining the nature and prevalence of abuse and neglect is important
for several reasons. First, policymakers need to know how serious and
extensive the problem is in order to determine the priority that should be
accorded to remedying the problem. Second, information about prevalence
is often an important determinant of funding for research.
     This section discusses issues related to research on prevalence of abuse
and neglect in long-term care settings. First, we discuss nursing homes and
then residential care facilities, if there are different issues. In addition to
deciding on how to define abuse and neglect for purposes of research,
several additional critical decisions and challenges must be addressed.


                      Prevalence of Abuse or Neglect
     The available evidence has been based on extremely diverse units of
analysis and resident, facility, and staff samples. Determining what the
focus should be in future research is challenging. One challenge involves
defining the nature of the phenomenon. Abuse is probably more easily
defined operationally than neglect, because neglect and general issues of
substandard quality are difficult to separate. Given that, the following are
the types of questions that might reasonably be asked, but each involves a
different sample design and data collection strategy.

     • How many residents in a given period experience abuse or neglect?
     • How many incidents of abuse and neglect occur in nursing homes
or residential care facilities (e.g., one resident might experience multiple
episodes of abuse over a period of time)?
     • How many staff members have abused or neglected one or more
residents?
     • How many staff members have witnessed abuse or neglect?
     • In what proportion of facilities does abuse or neglect occur?
478                                                            ELDER MISTREATMENT

                                   Sampling Issues
     There are a number of challenging issues to be decided relative to the
sample design for studies of the nature and prevalence of abuse and neglect
in long-term care settings. For example, most studies seeking to establish
prevalence will involve a multistage sample design. For example, a study
that proposed in-person interviews with residents or staff would probably
select geographic areas at the first stage, facilities at the second stage, and
residents or staff at the third stage.17


Sampling Facilities
      For nursing homes, a sampling list exists at the national level from the
OSCAR database listing all facilities that participate in Medicare or Medic-
aid. This covers nearly all licensed nursing homes (i.e., more than 95
percent) (Strahan, 1997).
      For residential care facilities, there is no national list of facilities. In-
deed, securing a list will be a challenging task. First, the list must be
constructed at the state level. Second, there are multiple licensing agencies
in many states. Thus, a decision must be made about what types of facili-
ties to include and what types to exclude. In general, there are two types of
residential care facilities. One group includes facilities specifically licensed
for special populations, such as for persons with substance abuse, mental
illness, or developmental disabilities. They represent a small proportion of
all residential care facilities (e.g., about 7,000 of more than 40,000 facili-
ties) and an even smaller proportion of beds (Clark et al., 1994; Hawes et
al., 1995a). Moreover, they tend to receive special funding for program-
matic services and to have higher staffing levels than traditional residential
care facilities. A second group of facilities, the most common, is licensed
for general populations and includes frail elderly and persons with psychi-
atric conditions. These facilities are generally licensed by state health de-
partments, departments of aging, and departments of community services.
In some states, there is a separate licensure category for very small homes
(e.g., two to six beds). Moreover, as noted, in a few states, even for the
general, mixed population facilities, there are multiple licensing agencies, or
some that license while others offer registration (e.g., for Medicaid waiver
programs) or certification. Thus, securing a comprehensive, unduplicated
list is a challenge.
      Another critical sampling issue is whether to oversample among larger
facilities. An estimated two-thirds of all residential care facilities have 2 to



  17This will also mean that researchers will need to use analytic software, such as SUDAAN.
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                        479

10 beds. However, an estimated two-thirds or more of all residents are
found in larger facilities (e.g., 11 beds or more).


Sampling Residents
     Decisions about sampling residents are intertwined with decisions about
data collection, and they too are challenging. As noted above, research
suggests that residents at highest risk for abuse and neglect are those with
cognitive impairment and behavioral symptoms. Research is more mixed
about whether greater levels of impairment in ADLs represent a risk factor.
In nursing homes, the majority of residents receive assistance in three or
more ADLs, so a random sample would produce adequate numbers of
residents with significant physical impairment. Most residents also have
moderate to severe cognitive impairment. Many (though not necessarily
all) of those will not be candidates for interviews. So, one key issue is how
one can collect valid information about the experience of these residents.
However, it will not be difficult in even a random sample to secure an
adequate number of residents with this risk factor.
     Other potential risk factors for abuse or neglect are less common among
nursing home residents. For example, the most recent data suggest that
fewer than 10 percent of residents are African American and only 9 percent
exhibit physically aggressive behaviors. Similarly, if one wished to have
results that were generalizable to short-stay residents, one would need to
oversample such residents.
     Fortunately, there are two sources of data that can inform sampling
decisions in nursing homes. The Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS)
Institutional Component provides estimates of the prevalence of various
conditions and risk factors among a national probability sample of resi-
dents (Krauss and Altman, 1998). Even more immediate data are available
through the national database CMS maintains on all nursing home resi-
dents in every nursing home certified to participate in the Medicare or
Medicaid programs. These data, taken from the Minimum Data Set (MDS),
provide information on hundreds of characteristics for the universe of resi-
dents.
     In residential care facilities, there is less current information available
with which to make sampling decisions about residents. The most recent
multistate study of residential care facilities is the 10-state study conducted
for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (Hawes et al., 1995a,b).
These data are from interviews conducted during 1993, and the states were
selected on the basis of their regulatory environment. Within those states,
facilities were selected on a random, stratified basis (i.e., size and licensure
status), and residents were randomly selected, as were staff members. How-
480                                                      ELDER MISTREATMENT

ever, the estimates these data produce are somewhat dated, particularly
because there is some expectation that acuity levels have been increasing in
RCFs in most states. A more recent ASPE study has produced data on a
national probability sample of assisted living facilities, residents, and staff
(Hawes et al., 1999, 2000). Rough estimates of resident acuity levels in
physical functioning (i.e., ADL) and cognitive status are available for all
facilities (Hawes et al., 1999), while more detailed data (e.g., behaviors,
falls) are available for residents in assisted living facilities that offer either
high services or high privacy (Hawes et al., 2000).
     Sampling decisions in residential care are complicated by the fact that
there appears to be significant variation across states. Some, like North
Carolina, have made aggressive use of RCFs to limit use of nursing homes.
In these states, the resident mix is considerably more impaired physically
and cognitively than in other states that have not pursued an aggressive
expansion in the number of RCFs and in the level of care that may be
provided in those facilities. In addition, there appear to be important
differences in resident characteristics among different types of residential
care facilities. For example, small homes are more likely to have residents
with primary psychiatric diagnoses. Similarly, the assisted living sector of
residential care is largely populated by persons who have higher incomes
and are more racially homogeneous than residents in traditional RCFs. If
these factors are expected to have an effect on the prevalence of abuse or
neglect, this must be considered in designing the sampling plan of any study
aimed at examining prevalence.


Sampling Staff
     There does not appear to be sufficient information about staff risk
factors from prior studies that would facilitate decisions about whether to
oversample certain types of staff. For example, one study suggests that the
belief that nursing home residents are childlike makes a staff member some-
what more likely to abuse residents, but there is no obvious way to initially
select a sample based on this characteristic. However, the MEPS study
provides general demographic data on nursing home staff, and the two
ASPE studies also provide such data on staff demographics, training and
education, and other characteristics.
     My strong recommendation would be to depart from prior studies that
interviewed only staff working during the shifts that field interviewers were
on site. In practice, when in-person interviews have been used to collect
data, this has meant that staff members who work during the morning and
evening shifts during the week were overrepresented in staff samples. Night
shifts and weekends, however, have a tendency to be short-staffed and to
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                           481

have the fewest supervisors available. Thus, staff working on these shifts
may be in situations when abuse and neglect are more likely to occur.
     Other decisions involve the type of staff to be studied. Although CNAs
provide more than 80 percent of hands-on care, other staff members—from
nurses to maintenance staff—are potential perpetrators as well as sources
of information about the prevalence and nature of abuse and neglect.


Data Collection Issues
     Data collection issues are extremely complex. Interviews with staff
members could be conducted by telephone or in person, with some research
suggesting that respondents are more willing to self-report illegal or ques-
tionable behavior when they are not being interviewed in person. In addi-
tion, this would facilitate interviewing staff who work night and weekend
shifts.
     Interviews with residents are more problematic on several fronts. Most
experts agree that in-person interviews are most likely to produce valid and
complete information about such sensitive information as their experiences
in nursing homes or RCFs. In interviews with residents about whether they
had ever had complaints about the care they received and how they handled
it, Barbara Bowers and I had great difficulty getting residents to discuss this
difficult topic. The Atlanta Ombudsman program, however, had substan-
tial success in its resident interviews, and it is probably worth speaking with
Karen Boyles, the Ombudsman Coordinator, about the methods they
used.18
     There is somewhat less agreement about what proportion of residents
can be interviewed. Many researchers use a set cutoff point on a scale that
measures cognitive function (e.g., Simmons and Schnelle, 2001). Others
argue for less reliance on set cut-points, opting to base decisions on initial
attempts to interview residents who are able to communicate and have
some remaining skills for daily decision making (e.g., Gwen Uman, per-
sonal communication, 1999; Morris, personal communication, 2000).
Moreover, researchers may wish to apply techniques used in the field of
research on persons with developmental disabilities to improve their ability
to secure information directly from residents with cognitive impairment.
     Whatever the decision about how many residents can be interviewed
and how to interview them more effectively, the fact remains that many
residents who are presumably at highest risk for abuse and neglect will not
be good subjects for interviews. There are at least four basic options for
proxy respondents for residents unable to respond verbally:


  18Karen Boyles, Atlanta Long-Term Care Ombudsman Coordinator, (404) 371-3800.
482                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

      • Use family members who regularly visit the cognitively impaired
resident as a proxy respondent. They can be interviewed in person or by
telephone. However, some studies suggest that family members report
levels of satisfaction with care higher than expressed by residents.
      • Use family members who are regularly present in the facility at
different times of the day. They may be good observers and reporters about
life in the facility or a good supplement to the reports of cognitively intact
residents.
      • Use cognitively intact residents as proxies. They may know more
about the day-to-day life of residents in the facility than family members,
who visit only at certain times of the day or week. On the other hand, in
facilities with special care units for persons with dementia or even those
that locate residents on different units by the type and level of acuity of the
resident, intact residents may not be in a position to observe directly the
care of residents who cannot respond for themselves.
      • Use multiple sources of information for residents who are unable to
respond for themselves, including medical records, interviews with family
members, interviews with roommates who are cognitively intact, observa-
tion of the resident, and interviews with direct care staff. This technique
demands highly trained and well-educated interviewers (e.g., RNs) but has
been effective in producing reliable information about residents’ health and
functional status, activities, mood, and preferences (Hawes et al., 1995d).

     Another challenging data collection issue is related to protection of
human subjects. Staff may be asked to report behavior by themselves or
others that is illegal, so confidentiality protections will be crucial. For
residents the issue is more complex. Residents and family members fear
retaliation if they complain about the care they receive. This is a particu-
larly problematic issue with respect to interviewing residents, because it is
difficult to find a place in which they can be interviewed in privacy, com-
pletely outside the hearing of others. Most residents in nursing homes and
RCFs (except assisted living facilities) have a roommate. In addition, CNAs,
housekeeping staff, laundry staff, and maintenance staff may be in and out
of a resident’s room as a normal course of business. Data collection efforts
must take this into account.
     It will also be difficult to provide reasonable information about the
nature of the study to the facility administrators while still protecting resi-
dents. It will be important to stress that the data collection is not aimed at
producing any report on individual facilities but rather at producing na-
tional estimates. In addition, it will be important to ensure that residents
who are selected for interviews are not placed at heightened risk for retali-
ation.
     Furthermore, any data collection efforts must consider what the re-
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                             483

sponsibility is of the field interviewers in terms of mandatory abuse report-
ing laws. Most state laws require reporting only if the individual witnesses
abuse, but some may be broader. In any event, some interviewers will be
told about incidents that involve illegal behavior—from rape to assault.
Such incidents will represent ethical, legal, and moral challenges for the
field interviewers and for the data collection firm.
     Finally, the National Institute on Aging (NIA) and other potential fund-
ing agencies should work closely with the IRB(s) of any grantees who are
selected to study abuse and neglect in nursing homes. In their attempts to
protect subjects, some IRBs place such severe restrictions on researchers
that meaningful and important research cannot be accomplished.



               CAUSES OF ABUSE AND NEGLECT AND
                  IMPLICATIONS FOR RESEARCH
    Research on the causes of abuse and neglect may be more important
even than prevalence, because it should provide clues to prevention. Such
research may address resident and staff risk factors, as well as institutional
and environmental factors.


                             Research on Causes

    A male nurse grabbed me, slung me on the floor, and threw me into the
    bed. He was in a bad mood because we were short-staffed, and he had to
    work two floors.
                                           Georgia nursing home resident
                     (Atlanta Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program, 2000)

    Facilities place CNAs in situations where abuse is bound to happen.
                                  Aide registry director (Hawes et al., 2001)

    Individuals come in who are not adequately trained, and then they have a
    heavy workload, frustrated, under-oriented, under-supervised, under-paid,
    under-trained.
                                  Aide registry director (Hawes et al., 2001)
    Although there has been only minimal research on the causes of abuse
and neglect in residential long-term care settings, there is remarkable con-
sensus among diverse studies and surveys of stakeholders. Three factors
about which there is widespread agreement are largely situational and in-
clude:
484                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

    • stressful working situations, particularly staffing shortages;
    • staff burnout, often a product of staffing shortages and mandatory
overtime; and
    • combination of resident aggression and poor staff training on how
to handle such challenging behaviors (Hawes et al., 2001; Pillemer and
Bachman-Prehn, 1991; Pillemer and Moore, 1989).


Staff Shortages
     As shown in Table 14-7, the directors and managers of the nurse aide
registries felt strongly that issues related to nursing home staffing levels,
training, and turnover were major factors causing or contributing to abuse
and neglect. Indeed, nearly all the responses, including the role of low
wages, emphasized the role of staffing shortages and poor staff to resident
ratios as major causes of abuse and neglect in nursing homes (Hawes et al.,
2001). This was consistent with prior studies. A recent study (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Health Care Financing Admin-
istration, 2000) found major staffing shortages in many nursing homes.
Similarly, hearings before the U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
(1998) and reports by the U.S. General Accounting Office and the U.S.
Office of the Inspector General for the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services identified staffing problems as major impediments to qual-
ity of care in nursing homes. For example, in 10 states surveyed by the
Office of the Inspector General (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Office of the Inspector General, 1999a), survey and certification



           TABLE 14-7 Nurse Aide Registry Agency Views
           on Main Causes of Abuse and Neglect
           Cited Cause                                Percenta

           Staffing shortages, too few staff,
              bad staff to resident ratios            85
           Staffing shortages and difficulty hiring
              qualified staff                         71
           Poor training                              61
           Poor supervision, management               51
           Staff turnover                             63
           Low wages                                  78
           Combative residents                        56
           Vulnerable consumers/residents             29

             aMultiple responses were allowed.
           SOURCE: Hawes et al. (2001).
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                                   485

staff, state and local ombudsmen, and directors of state units on aging
identified inadequate staffing levels as one of the major problems in nursing
homes. The OIG report concluded that the type of deficiencies commonly
cited “suggest that nursing home staffing levels are inadequate” (U.S. De-
partment of Health and Human Services, Office of the Inspector General,
1999a). Too few staff, low staff-to-patient ratios, and overworked employ-
ees result in increased stress levels, and in focus group interviews, CNAs
identified short-staffing as the major cause of abuse and neglect (Hawes et
al., 2001).


Staff Training and Aggressive Residents
     Staff in many of the state aide registry agencies believed that inadequate
training for CNAs was a major factor causing or contributing to abuse and
neglect. In part, they suggested, some CNAs might lack an understanding
of what constituted abuse. In addition, they argued that cultural factors
might play a role. For example, in some families slapping is not considered
abusive but an appropriate response to certain behaviors. A prior study
that surveyed nursing home staff who acknowledged abusing a resident
found that such CNAs were more likely to view the elderly “as children”
(Pillemer and Moore, 1989).

    There is this aphasic man from stroke. He’s a messy eater but likes to
    feed himself. He can be aggressive if I try to wipe his mouth. One day, he
    grabbed me, tried to bite me. If I grab him and sit him down, or even
    shove him into his chair to keep him from biting me [that] is not abuse.
    . . . Or some resident will come up behind you and pinch your bottom. I
    mean, if our spouses treated us like this, they’d be in jail . . . for domestic
    abuse. This man [the resident who had a stroke and tried to bite her] is
    cognitively alert. He knows what he is doing; I know he does, because all
    the time he was grabbing my hand and trying to bite me, he was grinning.
    And I don’t want my fingers in his mouth. I’ve seen what he puts in there.
    He puts BM [fecal matter] in his mouth and eats it. If I’m rough with
    him, I’m just protecting myself from injury.
                                                      CNA (Hawes et al., 2001)
     Several nurse side registry directors felt that many staff had difficulty in
handling residents with behavioral symptoms, particularly combative or
aggressive behaviors. Focus group interviews with CNAs demonstrated
that, in fact, many CNAs believed that combative behaviors, even among
residents with psychiatric illnesses or Alzheimer’s disease, were purposive
and that some “rough handling” by staff in response or to protect them-
selves was justified and not abusive (Hawes et al., 2001).
486                                                          ELDER MISTREATMENT

      It’s OK to be a little rough with a resident if it’s defense from attack by a
      resident. But you know, if the nurse sees fingerprints [bruises] on the
      resident, she will charge you with abuse. CNA #3

      We hear, if they have Alzheimer’s, they don’t know what they’re doing.
      But I mean it, if our husbands hit us like some residents do, he would be
      in jail. CNA #12

      If someone hits you on the head, surprises you, it’s sort of a body mecha-
      nism. You raise your arm. You might hit, but it’s reflex, not intentional.
      CNA #3

      I had a co-worker [who] had gotten a hepatitis B shot, and it was sore. A
      resident hit her. Her [the CNA’s] arm went up [she demonstrates raising
      her arm in a threatening way, as if to hit someone]. Automatic reflex.
      She lost her job. CNA #7

      Somebody sneaks up and hits you or pinches. You jump; you might hit
      someone. It’s automatic. CNA #12

      That’s not abusive. I agree. [That] resident should be brought up on
      disciplinary procedures. CNA #11
                                                             (Hawes et al., 2001)


     Indeed, one troubling finding from the CNA focus groups was that
there was disagreement among the CNAs about behaviors that were a
reaction to something a resident did. In particular, some of the CNAs felt
that rough handling of a resident who was physically aggressive with them
was justified and not abusive, especially if they perceived the behavior as
intentional. Some felt those reflexive actions—or what they termed a startle
response—were acceptable. In part, these CNAs felt they had a right to
defend and protect themselves from injury. In part, they believed the
residents’ aggressive behaviors were intentional, that is, that the resident
was aware of what he or she was doing. This belief often persisted even
when the examples given by the CNAs indicated that the residents had
some level of cognitive impairment.
      I have a somewhat different opinion on the reflex issue [of hitting back if
      startled by a resident]. You might get startled, but you know where you
      are. You’re in a nursing home. I tell my staff, who is the resident? The
      residents, they are who we’re here to care for. CNA #9

      But you know, it’s from physical reaction, not a thought process.
      CNA #3

      Well, you can’t let your physical reaction [control]. CNA #8
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                                  487

    I agree with . . . [CNA #9]. I think the startle reaction is a result of being
    overly stressed and overworked. I worked on a [Alzheimer’s] Special
    Care Unit, and I was having a really rough day. It was near the end of my
    shift, and we had been short-staffed all day. And this one resident who
    was really confused all the time just kept asking me the same question,
    over and over and over. She wouldn’t let me finish changing her, because
    she kept going on at me. I was so frustrated. And I just took her by the
    shoulders and kind of shouted [at her] “Why are you doing this?” And
    she looked at me, and with perfect clarity, said, “I don’t know.” And
    then . . . [she] cried. She cried, and I cried. CNA #8

    You never ever had a startle reflex? CNA #12

    Not on the job. You remember where you are; remember they are the
    residents. If you can’t control that startle thing without raising your hand
    to a resident, you shouldn’t work in a nursing home. CNA #9
                                                            (Hawes et al., 2001)
     In the focus groups, other CNAs argued that they had a right to protect
themselves from injury but spoke of multiple ways of achieving that with-
out resorting to rough handling of a resident. For example, two staff
members noted that their facility had a behavior committee that was spe-
cially trained to deal with residents who engaged in challenging or physi-
cally aggressive behaviors. This team could be called on if a CNA was
having difficulty. Other CNAs said that the policy in their facility was to
have a team of CNAs work with a physically difficult or aggressive resident,
for protection of both the resident and staff.
     In addition, there was disagreement about whether staff members were
justified in reflexive hitting, shoving, or yelling at a resident. Some CNAs
noted that these reactions and actions were more likely to occur when staff
members were tired and overworked, conditions more likely to arise when
the facility was short-staffed.
     Finally, it is worth noting that some research suggests that some atti-
tudes and experiences intrinsic to the staff member may play a role. Such
characteristics included staff having the view that residents were children
who needed discipline, staff who reported high levels of arguments or
conflict with residents, and those who reported having stressful personal
lives (Pillemer and Hudson, 1993; Pillemer and Moore, 1989).


                       Implications for Research Topics
    The following are a few suggestions about the types of research topics
that might generate better estimates of prevalence and inform efforts to
prevent abuse and neglect in nursing homes and residential care facilities.
488                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

Are There Ways to Improve Detection?
     • Autopsies might reveal more about prevalence if more deaths in
nursing homes and RCFs were examined (Collins et al., 2000).
     • Most nurses in two studies reported that the topic of elder abuse
and reporting requirements were not part of their nursing education (Pettee,
1997). It would be useful to determine whether curricula in schools of
nursing and continuing education programs include information on how to
recognize abuse and the responsibility of nurses to report suspected cases of
abuse, as recommended by Pettee (1997) and Weiler and Buckwalter (1992).
The same is true about neglect. It would be even more useful to determine
the effectiveness of different approaches to informing licensed nurses of
their responsibilities.
     • Do any EDs have protocols in place for identifying suspected cases
of abuse and neglect among residents of nursing homes and residential care
facilities, for documenting adequately to differentiate between accidental
trauma and abuse or neglect, and for reporting such cases to appropriate
authorities? Are these protocols followed? Are there any differences in
prevalence of reports and substantiated cases among EDs that have such
protocols and those that do not?
     • What has been the role of medical directors in facilities and resi-
dent physicians in detecting, reporting, and preventing abuse and neglect?
What might increase their ability to recognize abuse and neglect and their
willingness to report it when it occurs? What role can physician licensing
boards play?
     • What is the effect of ombudsman programs? Prior studies sug-
gested that the existence of the ombudsman program and presence of om-
budsmen visiting nursing homes on a regular basis did not influence abuse
reporting or even resulted in fewer survey deficiencies (Cherry, 1991; Litwin
and Monk, 1987). However, a more recent study analyzed the program
after legislation that enhanced its authority and found that the presence of
ombudsmen was associated with increased abuse reporting, higher substan-
tiation rates, higher rates of survey deficiencies, and increased use by state
survey agencies of enforcement sanctions (Nelson et al., 1995). In addition
to conflicting study findings, a current study surveyed state ombudsmen
and found differing views among them of their role in addressing com-
plaints about abuse from residents and families (Hawes and Blevins, 2001).
This study found many ombudsmen did not routinely file large numbers of
complaints with the state survey agencies (e.g., 38 percent of the ombuds-
men reported filing fewer than 10 complaints during the preceding year,
while 17 percent filed more than 100 complaints in the past 12 months). In
addition, they had differing views of the proper role of ombudsmen. Only
24 percent of the ombudsmen reported that they made follow-up calls to
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                      489

the state survey agency when a complaint of abuse or neglect had been filed.
Similarly, about one-third of the ombudsmen (36 percent) reported that
they filed a complaint only if they were unable to resolve the individual case
(Hawes and Blevins, 2001).

    These diverse findings suggest the need for:

     • Studies that identify different models of ombudsman programs and
examine their effect on the prevalence of reports, substantiation rates, defi-
ciency citations, and the use of enforcement sanctions.
     • An examination of the effect of various ombudsman interventions
on the prevalence and nature of abuse, including an analysis of the condi-
tions under which such interventions will be adopted, fully implemented,
and maintained over time in various types of facilities. Examples include
programs developed by CARIE (1991) (advocates in Philadelphia), the At-
lanta Long-Term Care Ombudsman program, and the North Shore Legal
Services Program.
     • An examination of the effects of different types of training for
nursing facility and RCF staff, resident and family education and empower-
ment interventions provided by ombudsmen programs (effects on both de-
tection and reporting as well as on prevention).


Causes
     • What is the relationship between abuse of residents and the work
conditions experienced by direct care staff (e.g., management style, staff
satisfaction with working conditions and management support, staff satis-
faction with wages and benefits)?
     • What is the relationship between aggressive or difficult behaviors
by residents and abusive behaviors by staff and whether aggressive staff
responses are moderated by staff training, staffing levels, or specific inter-
ventions (e.g., use of behavior management teams for residents with chal-
lenging behaviors)?
     • What staff characteristics are associated with a greater propensity
for abuse or neglect, including such factors as gender, reason for choosing
work in residential long-term care, attitudes about the elderly, and others?
     • What are risk factors for individual staff members—both situ-
ational, having to do with their work environment, and intrinsic?


Prevention
    • Evaluate different facility management styles (e.g., administrator,
director of nursing, unit charge nurses) associated with variations in rates
490                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

and types of abuse and neglect. In particular, one might follow up on Vince
Mor’s “good nursing home study” (Mor et al., 1986) and Bowers and
Becker’s work (1992) to determine whether certain management styles are
associated with less abuse and neglect.
     • Examine the effect of environmental factors (e.g., that make work
in nursing homes more or less difficult or burdensome for staff) and more
or less confusing (or in the case of bathrooms, unfamiliar and disturbing)
for residents with cognitive impairment.
     • Identify and evaluate any model employee screening and hiring
practices.
     • Evaluate the effects of different staffing models, particularly use of
permanent staff assignment to a group of residents (e.g., the primary care
model versus the floating CNA model).
     • Evaluate the effect of different staffing patterns, particularly in
terms of staff-to-resident ratios, on the prevalence and severity of abuse and
neglect.
     • Identify and evaluate interventions aimed at CNAs that are in-
tended to improve quality or explicitly to prevent abuse. The one most
highly regarded by ombudsmen is a training program developed by an
advocacy group, the Coalition of Advocates for the Rights of the Infirm
Elderly (CARIE), and researcher Karl Pillemer. This program has been
evaluated and found to be effective in changing both staff attitudes and
behaviors (Pillemer and Hudson, 1993). It would be useful to examine the
extent to which the effects persist and whether effects vary across different
facility types (e.g., different management styles, different staffing patterns
and staffing levels). Another training program worth evaluation might be
the one developed by North Shore Legal Services Program (MacDonald,
2000); however, they found difficulties in maintaining and expanding the
intervention in facilities.
     • Evaluate staff empowerment models, such as Wellspring. Such
research should include an analysis of the conditions under which such
interventions will be adopted, fully implemented, and maintained over time
in various types of facilities.
     • Evaluate models of culture change, such as the Eden Alternative, to
determine whether they reduce the prevalence or severity of abuse and
neglect. Such research should include an analysis of the conditions under
which such interventions will be adopted, fully implemented, and main-
tained over time in various types of facilities.
     • Evaluate the effect of different regulatory systems. For example,
Washington state has been identified as having a model program for quality
assurance and for detection and prevention of abuse and neglect, and om-
budsmen, facility administrators, and state agency nurse aide registry staff
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                                     491

report that incidents of physical abuse are much less common than the rates
reported in other states (Hawes et al., 2001; Hawes, based on site visit
interviews in 2001).


                                     REFERENCES
Administration on Aging
   1998     Instructions for Completing the State Long-term Care Ombudsman Program Re-
            porting Form for the National Ombudsman Reporting System (NORS). Wash-
            ington, DC: Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Secretary
            of the Administration on Aging.
   2000     FY 1998 Long-Term Care Ombudsman Report with Comparisons of National
            Data for FY 1996-1998. Washington, DC: Administration on Aging, Depart-
            ment of Health and Human Services. Available at: http://www.aoa.gov/
            ltcombudsman/98report/98finalreport.html.
American Medical Association
   1992     Diagnostic and Treatment Guidelines on Elder Abuse and Neglect. Chicago, IL:
            American Medical Association.
American Seniors Housing Association
   1998     Seniors Housing Construction Report—1998. Washington, DC: American Se-
            niors Housing Association.
Assisted Living Federation of America (ALFA)
   1998     The Assisted Living Industry: An Overview—1998. Fairfax, VA: Price
            Waterhouse for ALFA.
Atlanta Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program
   2000     The Silenced Voice Speaks Out: A Study of Abuse and Neglect of Nursing Home
            Residents. Atlanta, GA: Atlanta Legal Aid Society and Washington, DC: Na-
            tional Citizens Coalition for Nursing Home Reform.
Avorn, J., P. Dreyer, K. Connely, and S.B. Soumerai
   1989     Use of psychoactive medication and the quality of care in rest homes. New
            England Journal of Medicine 320(4):227–232.
Baldwin, V.R.
   1992     An Analysis of Subjective and Objective Indicators of Quality of Care in North
            Carolina Homes for the Aged. Dissertation, University of North Carolina at
            Chapel Hill, School of Public Health, Department of Health Policy and Adminis-
            tration.
Barlow, B., C. Puetz, J.S. Jones, and D.J. Ray
   1998     Institutional ‘accidents’: Is emergency department documentation adequate for
            assessment of elder abuse? Annals of Emergency Medicine 32(3)(Supplement,
            Part 2):S60.
Baron, S., and A. Wellty
   1996     Elder abuse. Journal of Gerontological Social Work 25(1/2):33–57.
Bates, E.
   1997     Mining the golden years: Homes for the elderly dig deep into tar heel politics—
            and hit pay dirt. The Independent. A series that ran from April 30 to May 6,
            1997.
Bernabei, R., G. Giovanni, K. Lapane, F. Landi, C. Gatsonis, R. Dunlop, L. Lipsitz, K. Steel,
and V. Mor
   1998     Management of pain in elderly patients with cancer. Journal of the American
            Medical Association 279(23):1877–1882.
492                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

Blakely, B.E., and R. Dolon
    1991     The relative contributions of occupation groups in the discovery and treatment of
             elder abuse and neglect. Journal of Gerontological Social Work 1(17):183–199.
Blaum, C.S., B.E. Fries, and M.A. Fiatarone
    1995     Factors associated with low body mass index and weight loss in nursing home
             residents. Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences 50A(3):M162–M168.
Bourland, M.D.
    1990     Elder abuse: From definition to prevention. Postgraduate Medicine 87(2):139–
             144.
Bowers, B., C. Hawes, S. Burger
    2001     Focus group interviews with family members of nursing home residents and indi-
             vidual interviews with residents about the complaint process. Conducted for the
             Complaint Investigation Improvement Project (CIP). Working papers at the
             School of Nursing, University of Wisconsin at Madison (Bowers) and the School
             of Rural Public Health, Texas A&M University System Health Science Center,
             College Station, TX (Hawes).
Bowers, B., and M. Becker
    1992     Nurse’s aides in nursing homes: The relationship between organization and qual-
             ity. The Gerontologist 32(3):360–366.
Bristowe, E., and J.B. Collins
    1989     Family mediated abuse of non-institutionalized frail elderly men and women liv-
             ing in British Columbia. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 1:45–64.
Budden, F.
    1985     Adverse drug reactions in long-term care facility residents. Journal of the Ameri-
             can Geriatrics Society 33:449–450.
Burgess, A.W., E. Dowdell, and R. Prentky
    2000     Sexual abuse of nursing home residents. Journal of Psychosocial Nursing 38:11–
             18.
California Advocates for Nursing Home Reform
    1998     Status Report on California’s Nursing Home Industry. San Francisco, CA: Cali-
             fornia Advocates for Nursing Home Reform.
Cherry, R.L.
    1991     Agents of nursing home quality of care: Ombudsmen and staff ratios revisited.
             The Gerontologist 31:302-308.
Clark, R., J. Turek-Brezina, C. Hawes, and C. Chu
    1994     The Supply of Board and Care Homes: Results from the 1990 National Health
             Provider Inventory. Presentation at the Gerontological Society of America, At-
             lanta, Georgia, November, 1994.
Clark-Daniels, C.L., R.S. Daniels, and L.A. Baumhover
    1990     Abuse and neglect of the elderly: Are emergency department personnel aware of
             mandatory reporting laws? Annals of Emergency Medicine 19:970–977.
Clarke, M.E., and W. Pierson
    1999     Management of elder abuse in the emergency department. Emergency Medical
             Clinics of North America 17(3):631-644.
The Coalition of Advocates for the Rights of the Infirm Elderly (CARIE)
    1991     Ensuring an Abuse-Free Environment: A Learning Program for Nursing Home
             Staff. Philadelphia, PA: CARIE.
Collins, K.A., A.T. Bennet, R. Hanzlick, and the Autopsy Committee of the College of Ameri-
can Pathologists
    2000     Elder abuse and neglect. Archives of Internal Medicine 160(11):1567–1569.
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                                      493

Coyne, A.C., W.E. Reichman, and L.J. Berbig
    1993     The relationship between dementia and elder abuse. American Journal of Psy-
             chiatry 150:643–646.
Doty, P., and E.W. Sullivan
    1983     Community involvement in combating abuse, neglect, and maltreatment in nurs-
             ing homes. Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly Health and Society 61:2.
Douglass, R.L., T. Hickey, and C. Noel
    1980     A Study of Maltreatment of the Elderly and Other Vulnerable Adults. Ann
             Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, Institute of Gerontology, unpublished manu-
             script.
Dyer, C.B., V. Pavlik, K.P. Murphy, and D.J. Hyman
    2000     The high prevalence of depression and dementia in elder abuse or neglect. Jour-
             nal of the American Geriatrics Society 48(2):205–208.
Ehrlich, F.
    1993     Patterns of elder abuse. Medical Journal of Australia 158(4):292.
Elon, R., and L.G. Pawlson
    1992     The impact of OBRA on medical practice within nursing facilities. Journal of the
             American Geriatric Society 40:958-963.
Fontana, A.
    1978     Ripping off the elderly inside nursing homes. In: Crime at the Top: Deviance in
             Business and the Professions, J.M. Johnson and J.M. Douglass, eds. Philadel-
             phia, PA: Lippincott.
Fralich, J.T., C.A. McGuire, and J. DiMillo
    1997     Developing a Case Mix System for Residential Care Facilities in Maine: Options
             and Issues. Prepared for the Maine-Net Demonstration Project (HCFA Grant
             #11-C904731/1-0) by the Edmund S. Muskie School of Public Service, University
             of Southern Maine, Portland, ME.
Fries, B., C. Hawes, J. Morris, C. Phillips, V. Mor, and P. Park
    1997     Effect of the national resident assessment instrument on selected health condi-
             tions and problems. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 45(8):994–1001.
Fulmer, T.T.
    1989     Mistreatment of elders: Assessment, diagnosis, and intervention. Nursing Clinics
             of North America 24:707–716.
Gubrium, J.F.
    1975     Living and Dying at Murray Manor. New York: St. Martin’s.
Hartzema, A.G., N.P. Godbout, S.D. Lee, T.R. Konrad, and F.M. Eckel
    1986     Evaluation of an educational intervention to reduce medication administration
             errors in domiciliary care facilities. Unpublished manuscript. Chapel Hill, N.C.:
             University of North Carolina, School of Pharmacy.
Hawes, C., M. Rose, and C. Phillips
    1999     A National Study of Assisted Living: Results of a National Survey of Facilities.
             Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the
             Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation.
Hawes, C.
    1997     The Prevalence of Undernutrition Among Nursing Home Residents. Testimony
             before the U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging–Forum on the Risk of Malnu-
             trition in Nursing Homes. Washington, DC, October 22, 1997.
494                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

Hawes, C., V. Mor, C.D. Phillips, B.E. Fries, J.N. Morris, E. Steele-Friedlob, A. Greene, and
M. Nennstiel
   1997    The OBRA-87 nursing home regulations and implementation of the resident as-
           sessment instrument: Effect on process quality. Journal of the American Geriat-
           rics Society 45(8):977–985.
Hawes, C., and D. Blevins
   2001    The Role of the Ombudsman in Nursing Home Complaint Investigations. Pre-
           sentation prepared for the annual meeting of the National Citizens Coalition for
           Nursing Home Reform, Arlington, DC (September 30 to October 3, 2001, post-
           poned). College Station, TX: Texas A&M University System Health Science
           Center School of Rural Public Health.
Hawes, C., D. Blevins, and L. Shanley
   2001    Preventing Abuse and Neglect in Nursing Homes: The Role of the Nurse Aide
           Registries. Report to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (formerly
           HCFA) from the School of Rural Public Health, Texas A&M University System
           Health Science Center, College Station, TX.
Hawes, C., M. Rose, and C. Phillips
   1999    A National Study of Assisted Living for the Frail Elderly: Results of a National
           Telephone Survey of Facilities. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and
           Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Long-Term
           Car. Available at: http://aspe.hhs.gov/daltcp/home.htm.
Hawes, C., V. Mor, J. Wildfire, L. Lux, R. Green, V. Iannacchione, and C. Phillips
   1995a Executive Summary: Analysis of the Effects of Regulation on the Quality of Care
           in Board and Care Homes. Report to the U.S. Department of Health and Human
           Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, Washing-
           ton, DC. Research Triangle Park, NC: Research Triangle Institute.
Hawes, C., J. Wildfire, V. Mor, V. Wilcox, D. Spore, V. Iannacchione, L. Lux, R. Green, A.
Greene, and C. Phillips, C.
   1995b A Description of Board and Care Facilities, Operators and Residents: Analysis of
           the Effect Of Regulation on the Quality of Care in Board and Care. Report to
           the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secre-
           tary for Planning and Evaluation, Washington, DC. Research Triangle Park, NC:
           Research Triangle Institute.
Hawes, C., L. Lux, J. Wildfire, R. Green, L. Packer, V. Iannacchione, and C. Phillips
   1995c Study of North Carolina Domiciliary Care Home Residents. Research Triangle
           Park, NC: Research Triangle Institute.
Hawes, C., J. Morris, C.D. Phillips, V. Mor, and B. Fries
   1995d Reliability estimates for the minimum data set for nursing facility resident assess-
           ment and care screening (MDS). The Gerontologist 35(2):172–178.
Hawes, C., J. Wildfire, and L. Lux
   1993    The Regulation of Board and Care Homes, Results of a 50-State Survey: Na-
           tional Summary. Washington, DC: American Association of Retired Persons.
Hawes, C.
   1990    The Institute of Medicine study: Improving quality of care in nursing homes. In:
           Advances in Long-Term Care, P. Katz, R.L. Kane, and M. Mezey, eds. New
           York: Springer.
Hayley, D.C., C.K. Cassel, L. Snyder, and M.A. Rudberg
   1996    Ethical and legal issues in nursing home care. Archives of Internal Medicine
           156(3):249–256.
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                                     495

Hodlewsky, R.T.
    1998     Facts and Trends: 1998—The Assisted Living Sourcebook. Washington, DC:
             National Center for Assisted Living, American Health Care Association.
Homer, A.C., and C. Gilleard
    1990     Abuse of elderly people by their caregivers. British Medical Journal 301:1359–
             1362.
Huber, R., K. Borders, F.E. Netting, and H.W. Nelson
    2001     Data from long-term care ombudsman programs in six states—The implications
             of collecting resident demographics. The Gerontologist 41:61–68.
Huber, R., F.E. Netting, and J.R. Kautz
    1996     Differences in types of complaints and how they are resolved by local ombuds-
             men operating in/not in Area Agencies on Aging. Journal of Applied Gerontol-
             ogy 15(1):87–101.
Institute of Medicine
    1986     Improving the Quality of Care in Nursing Homes. Committee on Nursing Home
             Regulation. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Jacobs, R.H.
    1969     One-way street: An intimate view of adjustment to a home for the aged. The
             Gerontologist 9:268–275.
Johnson, M.F., and A. Kramer
    1998     Quality of Care Problems Persist in Nursing Homes Despite Improvements since
             the Nursing Home Reform Act. Paper prepared for the Committee on Quality on
             Long-Term Care, Institute of Medicine. Denver, CO: University of Colorado
             Health Sciences Center.
Johnson, T., ed.
    1991     Elder Mistreatment: Deciding Who Is at Risk. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Kane, R.A., R.L. Kane, L.H. Illston, J.A. Nyman, and M.D. Finch
    1991     Adult foster care for the elderly in Oregon: A mainstream alternative to nursing
             homes? American Journal of Public Health 81(9):1113–1120.
Kane, R.A., and K.B. Wilson
    1993     Assisted Living in the United States: A New Paradigm for Residential Care for
             Frail Older Persons? Washington, DC: American Association of Retired Per-
             sons.
Kane, R.S., and J.S. Goodwin
    1991     Spontaneous fractures of the long bones in nursing home patients. American
             Journal of Medicine 90:263–266.
Kayser-Jones, J.
    1990     Old, Alone, and Neglected: Care of the Aged in Scotland and the United States.
             Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Kayser-Jones, J., and E. Schell
    1997     The effect of staffing on the quality of care at mealtime. Nursing Outlook
             45(2):64–72.
Kemper, P., and C. Murtaugh
    1991     Lifetime use of nursing home care. New England Journal of Medicine 324(9):
             595–600.
Kleinschmidt, K.C., P. Krueger, and C. Patterson
    1997     Elder abuse: A review. Annals of Emergency Medicine 30(4):463–472.
Krauss, N.A., and B.M. Altman
    1998     Characteristics of Nursing Home Residents—1996 (AHCPR Pub. No. 99-0006).
             Rockville, MD: Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. MEPS Research
             Findings No. 5.
496                                                              ELDER MISTREATMENT

Kyle, D.
   1998     Management and Oversight of Long-term Care in Louisiana. Legislative Audi-
            tor, Performance Audit Division. Baton Rouge, LA.
Lachs, M.S., L. Berkman, T. Fulmer, and R.I. Horowitz
   1994     A prospective community-based pilot study of risk factors for the investigation of
            elder mistreatment. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 42:169–173.
Lachs, M.S., and K. Pillemer
   1995     Abuse and neglect of elderly persons. New England Journal of Medicine
            333(7):437.
Lachs M.S., C. Williams, S. O’Brien, L. Hurst, and R. Horwitz
   1996     Older adults: An 11-year longitudinal study of adult protective service use. Ar-
            chives of Internal Medicine 156:449–453.
   1997     Risk factors for reported elder abuse and neglect: A nine-year observational
            cohort study. The Gerontologist 37:469–474.
Litwin, H., and A. Monk
   1987     Do nursing home patient ombudsmen make a difference?                  Journal of
            Gerontological Social Work 2:95–104.
MacDonald, P.
   2000     Make a Difference: Abuse/neglect Pilot Project. Danvers, MA: North Shore
            Elder Services. Project report to the National Citizens’ Coalition for Nursing
            Home Reform, Washington, DC.
Manard, B., N.B. Altmn, L. Kane, and A. Zeuschner
   1992     Policy Synthesis on Assisted Living for the Frail Elderly. Report to the U.S.
            Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for
            Planning and Evaluation. Fairfax, VA: Lewin-VHI, Inc.
Marshall, C.E., D. Benton, and J.M. Brazier
   2000     Elder abuse: Using clinical tools to identify clues of mistreatment. Geriatrics
            (Feb):55:42–53.
McNamara, R.M., E. Rousseau, and A.B. Sanders
   1992     Geriatric emergency medicine: A survey of practicing emergency physicians.
            Annals of Emergency Medicine 21:796–801.
Mendelson, M.A.
   1974     Tender Loving Greed. New York: Knopf.
Mollica, R.
   1998     State Assisted Living Policy–1998. Portland, ME: National Academy for State
            Health Policy.
Monk, A., L.W. Kaye, and H. Litwin
   1984     Resolving Grievances in the Nursing Home: A Study of the Ombudsmen Pro-
            gram. New York: Columbia University Press.
Mor, V., S. Sherwood, and C. Gutkin
   1986     A national study of residential care for the aged. The Gerontologist 26(4):405–
            417.
Morris, R.M.
   1998     Elder abuse: What the law requires. Available at: www.rnweb.com.
Moss, F., and V. Halamandaris
   1977     Too Old, Too Sick, Too Poor, Too Bad. Germantown, MD: Aspen Systems
            Corporation.
Murtaugh, C.M., P. Kemper, and B.C. Spillman
   1990     The risk of nursing home use in later life. Medical Care 28:952–962.
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                                       497

National Center on Elder Abuse
    1998      The National Elder Abuse Incidence Study. Report prepared for the Administra-
              tion on Aging and Administration for Children and Families in collaboration
              with Westat, Inc. Washington, DC: Author.
National Investment Center Conference
    1998      National Survey of Assisted Living Residents: Who Is the Customer? Annapolis,
              MD: National Investment Center.
Nelson, H.W., R. Huber, and K.L. Walter
    1995      The relationship between volunteer long-term care ombudsmen and regulatory
              nursing home actions. The Gerontologist 35:509–514.
New York Nursing Home Community Coalition
    1992      The Nursing Home Complaint System in New York State—Does It Work? New
              York: Nursing Home Community Coalition.
New York State Moreland Act Commission
    1975      Regulating Nursing Home Care: The Paper Tigers. Albany, NY: New York
              State Moreland Act Commission.
    1976      Long-term Care Regulation: Past Lapses, Future Prospects. Albany, NY: New
              York State Moreland Act Commission.
Ohio General Assembly Nursing Home Commission
    1978      A Program in Crisis: An Interim Report. Columbus, OH: Ohio General Assem-
              bly Nursing Home Commission.
O’Malley, T.A., D.E. Everitt, H.C. O’Malley, and E.W. Campion
    1983      Identifying and preventing family-mediated abuse and neglect of elderly persons.
              Annals of Internal Medicine 99:998–1005.
Paveza, G.J., C. Cohen, C. Eisdorfer, S. Freels, T. Semla, J.W. Ashford, P. Gorelick, R.
Hirschman, D. Luchins, and P. Levy
    1992      Severe family violence and Alzheimer’s disease: Prevalence and risk factors. The
              Gerontologist 32:493–497.
Pettee, E.J.
    1997      Elder abuse: Implications for staff development. Journal of Nursing Staff Devel-
              opment 13(1):7–12.
Phillips, C., C. Hawes, and M. Rose
    2000      A National Study of Assisted Living for the Frail Elderly: High Service or High
              Privacy Assisted Living Facilities, Their Residents and Staff: Results from a
              National Survey. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human
              Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Long-Term Care.
              Available at: http://aspe.hhs.gov/daltcp/home.htm.
Phillips, C., L. Lux, J. Wildfire, and C. Hawes
    1994      Long-term Care Ombudsman Activities in Board and Care Facilities. Paper com-
              missioned by the Institute of Medicine, Committee on Long-Term Care Ombuds-
              men. Research Triangle Park, NC: Research Triangle Institute.
Phillips, C.D., J.N. Morris, C. Hawes, B.E. Fries, V. Mor, M. Nennstiel, and V. Iannacchione
    1997      Association of the resident assessment instrument (RAI) with changes in function,
              cognition, and psychosocial status. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society
              45(8):986–993.
Pillemer, K., and R. Bachman-Prehn
    1991      Helping and hurting: Predictors of maltreatment of patients in nursing homes.
              Research on Aging 13:74–95.
Pillemer, K., and D. Finkelhor
    1988      The prevalence of elder abuse: A random sample survey. The Gerontologist
              28(10):51.
498                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

Pillemer, K., and B. Hudson
    1993     A model abuse prevention program for nursing assistants. The Gerontologist
             33:128–131.
Pillemer, K., and D.W. Moore
    1989     Abuse of patients in nursing homes: Findings from a survey of staff. The Geron-
             tologist 29:314–320.
Pillemer, K., and J.J. Suitor
    1992     Violence and violent feelings: What causes them among family caregivers? Jour-
             nal of Gerontology 47:S165–S172.
Podnieks, E.
    1992     National survey on abuse of the elderly in Canada. Journal of Elder Abuse and
             Neglect 4:5–58.
Reynolds, E., and S. Stanton
    1983     Elder abuse: A nursing perspective. In: Abuse and Maltreatment of the Elderly:
             Causes and Interventions, J.I. Kosberg, ed. Boston: John Wright.
Shapira, E.Z.
    2000     Elder abuse: Society’s forgotten issue. General Dentistry (Sept./Oct.) 48(5): 490,
             492.
Simmons, S.F., and J.F. Schnelle
    2001     The identification of residents capable of accurately describing daily care: Impli-
             cations for evaluating nursing home care quality. Gerontologist (Oct.) 41(5):
             605–611.
Spector, W.D., J.A. Fleishman, L.E. Pezzin, and B.C. Spillman
    2001     Characteristics of Long-Term Care Users. Paper commissioned by the Institute
             of Medicine, Committee on Improving Quality in Long-Term Care. Publication
             No. 00-0049. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
Spore, D., V. Mor, J. Hiris, E.P. Larrat, and C. Hawes
    1995     Psychotropic use among older residents of board and care facilities. Journal of
             the American Geriatrics Society 43(12):1403–1409.
    1996     Regulatory environment and psychotropic use in board and care facilities: Re-
             sults of a 10-state study. Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences 51A(3):
             M131–M141.
    1997a Inappropriate drug prescriptions for elderly residents of board and care facilities.
             American Journal of Public Health 87(3):404–409.
    1997b Suboptimal drug prescriptions for elderly residents of board and care facilities.
             Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences 87(3):404–409.
Stannard, C.
    1973     Old folks and dirty work: The social conditions for patient abuse in a nursing
             home. Social Problems 20:329–342.
Stark, A.J., R.L. Kane, R.A. Kane, and M. Finch
    1995     Effects on physical functioning of care in adult foster homes and nursing homes.
             Gerontologist 35(5):648–655.
Steigel, L.A.
    1995     Recommended Guidelines for State Courts Handling Cases Involving Elder Abuse.
             Washington, DC: American Bar Association.
Strahan, G.W.
    1997     An Overview of Nursing Homes and Their Current Residents: Data from the
             1995 National Nursing Home Survey, Advance Data from Vital and Health Sta-
             tistics (No. 280). Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
Tatara, T.
    1990     Elder Abuse in the United States: An Issue Paper. Washington, DC: National
             Aging Resource Center.
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS                                                   499

Tatara, T., and L. Kuzmeskus
   1996- Elder Abuse in Domestic Settings. Elder Abuse Information Series, No 1. Wash-
   1997     ington, DC: National Center on Elder Abuse.
Thompson, M.
   1997     Fatal neglect: In possibly thousands of cases, nursing home residents are dying
            from a lack of food and water and the most basic level of hygiene. Time
            150(17):34–38 (October 27).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
   2001     Quarterly Report on the Progress of the Nursing Home Initiative (January). Bal-
            timore, MD: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, U.S. Department of
            Health and Human Services.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Care Financing Administration
   2000     Appropriateness of Minimum Nurse Staffing Ratios in Nursing Homes: Phase 1
            Report. Baltimore, MD: Health Care Financing Administration.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Inspector General
   1990a Resident Abuse in Nursing Homes: Resolving Physical Abuse Complaints. Wash-
            ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
   1990b Resident Abuse in Nursing Homes: Understanding and Preventing Abuse. Wash-
            ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
   1997     State of Maryland’s Ombudsman Program for Processing of Elder Abuse and
            Neglect Complaints and Accuracy of Geriatric Nurse Aide Registry. Washing-
            ton, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
   1998     Safeguarding Long-term Care Residents. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
            Printing Office.
   1999a Quality of Care in Nursing Homes: An Overview. Washington, DC: U.S.
            Government Printing Office.
   1999b Abuse Complaints of Nursing Home Residents (OEI-06-98-00340). Washing-
            ton, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. General Accounting Office
   1989     Insufficient Assurances That Residents’ Needs are Identified and Met. Report to
            Congressional Requesters. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
   1992a Board and Care Homes: Elderly at Risk from Mishandled Medications. Report
            to House Subcommittee on Health and Long-Term Care. Washington, DC: U.S.
            Government Printing Office.
   1992b Drug Use and Misuse in America’s Board and Care Homes: Failure in Public
            Policy. Report to House Select Committee on Aging. Washington, DC: U.S.
            Government Printing Office.
   1999a California Nursing Homes: Care Problems Persist Despite Federal and State
            Oversight (GAO/HEHS-98-202). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
            Office.
   1999b Nursing Homes: Complaint Investigation Processes Often Inadequate to Protect
            Residents (GAO/HEHS-99-80). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
            Office.
   1999c Nursing Homes: Additional Steps Needed to Strengthen Enforcement of Federal
            Quality Standards (GAO/HEHS-99-46). Washington, DC: U.S. Government
            Printing Office.
U.S. House of Representatives
   2001     Abuse of Residents Is a Major Problem in U.S. Nursing Homes. Committee on
            Government Reform, Special Investigations Division, Minority Staff report pre-
            pared for Representative Henry A. Waxman. Washington, DC: U.S. Govern-
            ment Printing Office.
500                                                             ELDER MISTREATMENT

U.S. House of Representatives, Select Committee on Aging
   1989     Board and Care Homes in America: A National Tragedy (Comm. Pub. No. 101-
            711). A report by the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Health and Long-Term
            Care, House of Representatives.
   1990     Elder Abuse: A Decade of Shame and Inaction. Hearing by the Subcommittee
            on Health and Long-Term Care.
U.S. Senate
   1970     Medicare and Medicaid: Problems, Issues and Alternatives. Report of the Staff
            to the Committee on Finance. Committee Print, 91st Congress, 1st Session. Wash-
            ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
   1971     Trends in Long-Term Care—Part 18. Subcommittee on Long-Term Care, Senate
            Special Committee on Aging. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Of-
            fice.
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging
   1974- Nursing Home Care in the United States: Failure in Public Policy. An Introduc-
   1975     tory Report; (1975—a series of additional reports). Senate Report No. 73-1420,
            93rd Congress, 2nd Session. Subcommittee on Long-Term Care, Special Com-
            mittee on Aging. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
   1998     Hearing on Crooks Caring for Seniors: The Case for Criminal Background
            Checks (Print 105-33). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Vladeck, B.C.
   1980     Unloving Care: The Nursing Home Tragedy. New York: Basic Books.
Watson, M.M., T.C. Cesario, S. Ziemba, and P. McGovern
   1993     Elder abuse in long-term care environments: A pilot study using information
            from long-term care ombudsmen reports in one California County. Journal of
            Elder Abuse and Neglect 5:95–111.
Weiler, K., and K.C. Buckwalter
   1992     Geriatric mental health:      Abuse among rural mentally ill.        Journal of
            Gerontological Nursing 30(9):32–36.
Wolf, R.S.
   1988     Elder abuse: Ten years later. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 36:758–
            762.
Wolf, R.S., and K. Pillemer
   1989     Helping Elderly Victims: The Reality of Elder Abuse. New York: Columbia
            University Press.
                   15
       Elder Abuse Intervention:
Lessons from Child Abuse and Domestic
           Violence Initiatives
                              David A. Wolfe*




                            D   espite being in the public eye for many years,
progress in all areas of research, causes, consequences, and interventions of
elder abuse has been very slow. Consequently, there is a noticeable lack of
intervention initiatives or evaluations in this field. A recent review of
interventions in child abuse, elder abuse, and domestic violence identified
144 controlled evaluations, yet only 2 dealt with the topic of elder abuse
(Chalk and King, 1998). This is not surprising, however, when one consid-
ers how intervention in related areas of domestic violence developed slowly
at first, hampered by a lack of research findings on causes and limited
funding directives. Almost in stages, the related fields of child abuse and
domestic violence grew from the voices of concerned practitioners as well
as survivors, gaining the attention of the public and the recognition of
researchers and professionals. Efforts to understand and deal with abuse of
the elderly by family members or other caregivers are reminiscent of where
the study of child abuse and woman abuse was 20 years ago. Although
there is still much to be done in terms of detection and investigation in these
two related fields, knowledge gained from past and recent efforts may
benefit current intervention planning in elder abuse.
     The current chapter is intended to offer insights into intervention and




  *David A. Wolfe, Ph.D., is a professor in the Department of Psychology at the Social
Science Center, University of Western Ontario.

                                        501
502                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

prevention possibilities with elder abuse on the basis of findings in related,
but somewhat more advanced, areas of child abuse and domestic violence.
Importantly, this chapter does not address the full extent of the problem of
elder abuse or the full range of interventions available to address it; rather,
it examines intervention possibilities involving some form of elder abuse
based on other forms of family violence. The common denominator for
this discussion is that all three populations involve close, interdependent
relationships with others, which form the potential circumstances and con-
text for abuse. At the same time, there are many important differences
between the contexts and consequences of elder abuse when compared to
other abused populations, and these differences have important implica-
tions for how one might intervene with the elderly. Nonetheless, lessons
derived from progress in child abuse and domestic violence initiatives pro-
vide a valid starting point for drawing more attention to elder abuse.
      Cynically, one could argue that little progress has been made in ad-
dressing the fundamental causes and consequences of the many forms of
domestic violence, as well as their effects on children, over the past three
decades. These problems seem as serious as ever and major underlying
causes, such as abuse of power, inequality, and modeling of violence in the
home, remain largely unchanged. Unfortunately, society’s response to these
difficult problems has been largely one of detection and management, in
which services are given on an individual basis only when it becomes abso-
lutely necessary. Although crisis management makes sense when the inter-
vention is critically needed and highly effective at a particular point in time,
it is poorly suited to address fully the dynamics of woman, child, and elder
abuse (Wolfe and Jaffe, 2001). Unless additional resources and strategies
are brought to bear, the task far exceeds the capabilities of most crisis
intervention approaches, which are a necessary but insufficient part of our
response to domestic violence.
      From a more optimistic perspective, in less than two decades scientific,
professional, and activist groups have played a prominent role in recogniz-
ing the links between various forms of domestic violence and serious mental
health and other issues (Peled et al., 1995). Shelters for battered women
and their children have increased dramatically, there are more laws on the
books, and there is consensus that family members who are maltreated by
other family members must be protected (Family Violence Prevention Fund,
1998). Increased interest and understanding by researchers and clinicians
in the field of domestic violence make it possible to establish a scientific
foundation for implementing prevention and treatment initiatives and pub-
lic policy to end elder abuse and related forms of violence.
      Society’s responses to woman abuse and child abuse, in particular, took
more than two decades to turn from preliminary recognition and acknowl-
edgment to more uniform opposition and action. While legal changes
LESSONS FROM CHILD ABUSE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE                                        503

created an impetus for change, an initiative for change is also emerging
from various professions to recognize the signs of domestic violence and to
conduct proper inquiries and referrals when such cases come to their atten-
tion. Despite their pivotal role, however, the training and education of
health care professionals about family violence remain inadequate for
proper intervention (Institute of Medicine, 2001).
     Mental health professions have adopted standards, procedures, and
practices for dealing with many forms of domestic violence, which have
been implemented sporadically at community, state, and national levels.
Social service professionals have supported and often been responsible for
the development of new treatment orientations and options for both vic-
tims and perpetrators of domestic violence. At a preventative level, many
communities have recognized their responsibility in dealing with woman
and child abuse issues through training programs, education, and the allo-
cation of resources to relevant individuals and families. Finally, the general
public’s level of consciousness has been raised by the widespread use of hot
lines, abuse registries, and public education campaigns.1 This chapter
considers how these developments in related areas of domestic violence can
inform the field of elder abuse intervention.


               ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION ISSUES

                              Screening and Detection
     There have been numerous attempts in the last decade to develop screen-
ing instruments to identify persons at risk for elder abuse or neglect, follow-
ing the lead of child welfare authorities. However, detection of abuse and
neglect of the elderly is complicated by a number of factors, such as the
recognition that older adults are often unwilling to report abuse due to
feelings of shame, fear of retaliation, or fear of being placed in an institu-
tion (Mulligan, 1990). By and large, elder abuse investigators have devel-
oped screening instruments much like those aimed at detecting child or
woman abuse, which are designed and put into place by persons in hospi-
tals and other front-line community-based settings.
     The goals of risk assessments are to guide and structure decision-mak-
ing, to predict future harm and classify cases, to aid in resource manage-




   1Although these changes have had a dramatic impact on the problem of domestic violence,
especially considering the relatively short period of time in which a social change of this
magnitude has been accomplished, they have been far from universal and consistent across
North America
504                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

ment by identifying service needs for children and families, and to facilitate
communication within the agency and other community stakeholders
(Hollinshead and Fluke, 2000). Evidence suggests that risk and safety
assessments have benefited children and families in the child welfare sys-
tem. Implementation of an immediate safety assessment protocol for chil-
dren in Illinois, for example, resulted in a 23 percent decrease of recurrence
in a six-month period; three years after the implementation of this tool the
recurrence rates were down by over 28 percent (Fluke et al., 1999).
     The problem of woman abuse has also been approached through im-
proved screening and detection, especially in relation to suspicious injury.
Like elder abuse, the problem is complicated by the fact that most battered
women are reluctant to volunteer the circumstances related to their injuries.
However, when they are directly asked if this is the case, most women
disclose the relevant information (Hotch, 1994). The conventional wisdom
that women in abusive relationships are reluctant to disclose such informa-
tion or that they resist efforts to change the nature of their relationship is
not supported—more often than not, battered women will share their expe-
riences with medical personnel when provided with a nonconfrontational
and nonjudgmental atmosphere. Consequently, many hospitals now have
protocols for screening woman abuse and other forms of domestic violence,
which typically include a list of warning signs and symptoms that should
prompt specific questions during the history-taking procedure. Such proto-
cols may also serve as training instruments to ensure ongoing awareness
and sensitivity to potential domestic violence victims. The Vancouver Gen-
eral Hospital, for example, reported that their rate of correctly detecting
domestic violence cases increased 2.5 times as the result of introducing such
a protocol (Jaffe et al., 1996).
     The assessment of elderly persons who may be at risk for maltreatment
by a family member is currently less formalized than is true of the other
types of domestic violence. Whereas the medical system plays a prominent
role in elder abuse, there are important insights that the mental health and
social service systems can add to the overall assessment of persons at risk
for family abuse, especially concerning victim and family characteristics.
     Several elder abuse-screening instruments are currently available, which
direct attention toward characteristics of the person, the caregiver, or the
family system (e.g., Kozma and Stones, 1995; McDonald, 1996; Reis and
Nahmiash, 1995, 1998). These measures are used as brief screening tools
to identify persons who may be at risk for further follow-up and assess-
ment, based on known indicators of elder abuse. The 29-item Indicators of
Abuse (IOA) screening measure, for example, is based on an abuse-indica-
tor model comprised of three main types of abuse signals: (a) caregiver
personal problems/issues; (b) caregiver interpersonal problems/issues; (c)
care receiver social support shortages and past abuse. Although practical,
LESSONS FROM CHILD ABUSE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE                            505

screening methods are limited by the few studies in this area. Some mea-
sures overly focus on adult children as potential perpetrators of elder abuse
or fail to recognize some of the contextual aspects of abuse, such as chronic
stress resulting from long-term responsibilities of a fragile, elderly, combat-
ive individual (McDonald and Collins, 2000). Moreover, most existing
measures are biased toward factors related to physical abuse and neglect,
with less attention paid to factors of psychological and financial abuse or
violation of the person’s rights.


                             Intervention Goals
     Following efforts by advocates to recognize the basic humanitarian
need for assistance, most intervention and prevention efforts in elder abuse,
child abuse, and domestic violence began with broadly based services of-
fered within existing social networks. As greater recognition occurred,
some communities introduced additional specialized services and resources,
such as changes to laws and policies, training of professionals, and estab-
lishing abuse registries and telephone hot lines. The next stage of interven-
tion usually involves coordinated, system-integrated approaches to enhance
the quality of services already available, which are in place in many North
American communities for child and woman abuse, but much less so for
elder abuse. Once in place, prevention programs in schools, law enforce-
ment agencies, and similar organizations can begin to promote awareness
and deterrence of elder abuse and related forms of domestic violence in the
true prevention sense (Wolfe and Jaffe, 2001).
     Like child abuse, elder abuse interventions have primarily arisen from
either agency- or community-based initiatives. This reflects the mandate of
adult protective service agencies and their procedures for responding to
abuse and neglect, whereas community-based efforts attempt to integrate
or coordinate services found throughout the community in other social
service agencies. Typically, intervention protocols include a variety of
approaches that include legal, therapeutic, educational, and advocacy
complements (Reis and Nahmiash, 1995). Throughout the 1990s some
progress was made in terms of initiatives for elder abuse designed for both
protection efforts and community services, although no systematic evalua-
tions have been conducted.
     Existing approaches to elder abuse intervention focus primarily on
three overlapping goals and strategies: (1) legislative, including statutory
adult protection service programs, modeled after child abuse initiatives; (2)
community services, based on integrated models that attempt to provide
coordinated services spanning legal, medical, and psychosocial needs of at-
risk seniors, modeled after domestic violence strategies; and (3) education
and prevention, including advocacy and empowerment for seniors, derived
506                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

from the aging network (Anetzberger, 2000). Each of these approaches is
discussed below, drawing heavily from child abuse and domestic violence
intervention experiences in light of limited knowledge specific to elder abuse.
As noted in a recent volume on violence in families (Chalk and King, 1998),
major issues especially challenging to effective interventions in the area of
elder abuse include the degree of dependence between offenders and vic-
tims, limited funding for programming support, and striking a balance
between privacy and individual rights.


                           Legislative Intervention
     Over the last 30 years, the legal system’s response to most forms of
domestic violence has gradually shifted from one in which the maltreatment
of family members was tolerated and even condoned to one of almost
universal condemnation. This change is reflected in criminal law, tort law,
family law, immigration law, and even international human rights law.
During the 1970s, for example, a series of international and national con-
ferences on child abuse, woman abuse, and abuse of the elderly resulted in
new laws and initiatives at all levels of jurisdictions designed to cope with
these concerns in both the United States and Canada. Some of these efforts
represented extensions and revisions of existing civil and criminal statutes,
while others were attempts at new forms of intervention and services. The
end result was that, in one manner or another, new statutes concerning
domestic violence in all its forms are now in place throughout North
America. However, there are still fewer legal options available to older
victims than for other victims of domestic violence (Jaffe et al., 1996).


Adult Protection
     All U.S. states and Canadian provinces have enacted special adult pro-
tection legislation (McDonald and Collins, 2000). Influenced by child
welfare models, such legislation provides legal powers of investigation,
intervention, and mandatory reporting. Typically, these methods give ex-
tensive powers of investigation to specific agencies, including the authority
to apply to the court for provision of services to those found incapable. To
assist in implementation of these legal interventions, some communities
have developed resource networks consisting of local health, social service,
and legal agencies that provide resources to respond to elder abuse and
neglect in an integrated and cooperative manner (see Coordinated Commu-
nity Responses, below). Such networks provide a continuum of services to
abused adults, act as a resource for service providers, and offer reliable and
consistent service to consumers (McDonald and Collins, 2000).
     Adult protection laws relating to the elderly closely resemble the pro-
LESSONS FROM CHILD ABUSE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE                            507

tective services model derived from child abuse legislation, in contrast to
the law enforcement model of domestic violence laws. Advocates of adult
protection legislation argue that older adults are safeguarded by such means,
and attempts can be made to improve their level of functioning while
protecting them from harm. Similar to the foster care crisis pursuant to
child welfare legislation, however, an overemphasis on adult protection
poses the risk of increased placement of seniors in institutions. In the
absence of evaluation findings, the value of adult protection legislation is
considered below in light of similar measures accompanying child welfare
and domestic violence initiatives.


Child Protection
     State intervention for children was predicated on the assumption that
alternative care by the state (i.e., removing children from abusive or danger-
ous family environments) was a benevolent intervention when families had
failed or violated standards of care. Alternative care was assumed to re-
move the child from harm and provide a stable and therapeutic environ-
ment, as well as to provide a brief period for family rehabilitation. This
view has been challenged more recently by the realization that not all
interventions are beneficial and, in fact, can do more harm than good in
some cases by introducing further victimization and disruption into the
child’s life (Melton, 1990; Wolfe and Jaffe, 1991). Thus, confusion re-
mains between the needs and rights of children and families.
     The traditional response of the juvenile court system that emerged from
child welfare legislation was, generally, to maintain or reunify the entire
family, including the abuser. This policy became controversial, however, as
authorities argued that often the best protection for abused children is to
assist their mothers in keeping the abusive father away from both the child
and the mother. Some courts now advocate reunification for only the
nonviolent family members.
     Wald and colleagues (1988) examined whether maltreated children
benefit more from foster care or from home care. They found that im-
proved services to families, such as counseling, health care, parent educa-
tion and support, can help to keep abused and neglected children in their
home residences, but not without significant costs. That is, children in both
settings showed signs of emotional stress and adjustment difficulties that
related to the dilemmas in their respective environments. At home, they
had to deal with ongoing family disorganization and conflict, and in foster
care settings children had to confront disruption and adapt to a new family
system. Therefore, the impact of either placement must be evaluated not
only in terms of the children’s personal safety, but also in reference to their
social, emotional, and intellectual development (a similar argument often
508                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

arises in the debate concerning protection of elders from abuse). In either
home or foster care these children require a high level of services for many
years to cope with the trauma they have experienced. In effect, legal
interventions for children were intended to provide a safety net for abused
children, based on the belief that it is in their best interest to be protected
from abuse and neglect. Paradoxically, such protection carries with it
certain risks to the child’s ongoing development and family relationship.


Domestic Violence Laws
    Men who are physically abusive toward their partners and/or children
typically come to the attention of domestic violence specialists through
either arrest or treatment referral. Unfortunately, studies on the efficacy of
both arrest and treatment outcomes with this population are discouraging:
Neither arrest nor treatment has been shown to have large effects on men’s
violent behavior toward their partners. This finding points to the need to
intervene before patterns of abusive behavior are developed. Specific legal
interventions derived from the domestic violence literature are considered
below in terms of their relevance to the elderly and how they might be
changed to suit the elderly.

Restraining (Protection) Orders. Restraining orders, an approach that
emerged in both U.S. and Canadian legal systems to deal with domestic
violence, are intended to “restrain” someone (usually a family or ex-family
member) from contact with another family member. All North American
courts authorize the use of restraining orders, although jurisdictions may
issue them under different conditions (e.g., in some cases a restraining order
may be issued simply on the basis of threats, while in others physical abuse
must be alleged). They also differ in how the order is enforced and in its
duration. Many states also authorize juvenile court judges to issue restrain-
ing orders against one or both parents of an abused child, reducing the risk
of further harm to the child.
    Although few studies offer a definitive conclusion, the overall effect of
such orders appears to be beneficial; nonetheless, a restraining order can
also increase the risk to the petitioner. Such orders apparently work best in
cases where the conditions in the order are clearly specified, where the
defendant understands the consequences for violating the order, and where
the punishment is strictly enforced if the order is violated (Jaffe et al.,
1996).

Criminal Law and Arrest Policies. In the mid-1980s considerable attention
was focused on arrest as a possible treatment for domestic violence offend-
ers, prompted by the publication of results from the Minneapolis Domestic
LESSONS FROM CHILD ABUSE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE                           509

Violence Experiment (Sherman and Berk, 1984; for detailed review see
Chalk and King, 1998). However, replications of the Minneapolis experi-
ment largely revealed that arrest has, at best, a small deterrence effect for
domestic violence offenses; men’s history of assault is, by far, the strongest
predictor of future domestic violence offences (Scott and Wolfe, 2000).
     Since enactment of the Violence Against Women Act, communities
have increased coordination and cooperation among police, prosecutors,
victim advocates, the judiciary, and other community institutions related to
domestic violence (Sullivan and Allen, 2001). Although controversy over
the relative benefits of arrest in domestic violence cases continues, many
state and provincial legislatures and local police departments have adopted
pro-arrest, warrantless arrest, or mandatory arrest policies in such cases.
Some policies have mandated arrest for violations of restraining orders;
others do not mandate arrest for spouse abuse or restraining order viola-
tions but do require the investigating officer to file a report stating why an
arrest was not made. In some jurisdictions, mandatory arrest policies have
led to high numbers of battered women being arrested; the current trend is
to require officers to determine which party is the primary aggressor, so
that victims acting in self-defense are not arrested (Edleson, 1999). Finally,
many states and police departments have mandated training programs on
domestic violence as part of their initial and ongoing advanced officers’
training programs. Increasingly, policies also call for law enforcement to
provide a resource card to victims, arrange for medical help, and provide
transportation for the victim to a safe place.


Implications
     Domestic violence laws, aimed at protecting abused women (and some-
times men) from abusive partners remain controversial and untested in
relation to elder abuse. On the one hand, the nature of the dependency
relationship between older persons and their caregivers is different from
other forms of domestic violence. For example, an older person may de-
pend on a relative for survival in the community, with relatively few alter-
native residential options. Abused partners sometimes have other options
with respect to leaving an abusive relationship and/or having the abuser
removed without jeopardizing their own survival. The nature of the depen-
dency relationship, therefore, has important implications for the relevance
of domestic violence laws such as restraining orders or criminal law and
arrest policies.
     On the other hand, approaches to elder abuse that underscore power
and control issues (rather than caregiving stress or other contributing fac-
tors) remain viable (Harbison, 1999). In this regard, courts may need to
510                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

protect older persons while considering their best interests in terms of
existing family and community supports and living arrangements, including
necessary accommodations (e.g., for mobility, hearing, or memory impair-
ments) to improve the experiences of older victims with the court system
(Brandl and Meuer, 2000). Although elder abuse laws are viewed by
practitioners as more effective when mandatory reporting is included (Bond
et al., 1995), opponents argue that mandatory reporting to identify elder
abuse must be accompanied by appropriate programs and services
(Macolini, 1995).
     Recent evaluations of the benefits derived from mandatory child abuse
reporting laws that have been in place for four decades provide some direc-
tion to this issue. Due to mounting criticisms of the lack of services follow-
ing child protection investigations and the ensuing family disruption (U.S.
Advisory Board on Child Abuse and Neglect, 1993), efforts at reform were
initiated in the 1990s. Several states have implemented a dual response
system in which only the most serious cases are investigated and less serious
cases are referred to community-based services. The states of Florida and
Missouri have both conducted major evaluations of these reforms and have
found that a dual response system can result in positive changes in child
safety, family satisfaction, and community involvement in child protection.
Child protective services reforms in both of those states were related to
lower rates of re-referral, improved family satisfaction, and increased use of
community services (Gordon, 2000).

                            Community Services
     Community services for child abuse and domestic violence have been
widely used, and similar approaches to elder abuse and neglect have gained
proponents in recent years. Community responses are usually integrated to
reduce costs and oversights and involve crisis intervention services (such as
hot lines, police involvement in laying charges, protection orders, and emer-
gency and secondary shelters) as well as legal clinics and ongoing support
groups. Such methods usually involve educating the public and the abuse
victim about their rights as well.
     Although this approach has considerable strength, some practitioners
caution that some components, such as the use of crisis intervention, are
problematic with the elderly because their problems tend to take a longer
time to sort out (McDonald and Collins, 2000). Moreover, community
services tend to focus primarily on cases of physical abuse and thus may be
less geared to the needs of the neglected elderly. Below we consider medical
and psychological efforts to address elder abuse, followed by the beginnings
of a coordinated community response to elder abuse.
LESSONS FROM CHILD ABUSE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE                           511

Medical/Psychological
     Because few high-risk elderly people are involved in social networks
(e.g., school, employment, etc.), opportunities to respond to suspected cases
of abuse and neglect are limited to those who come into contact with the
family (e.g., physicians, visiting nurses, hospital staff, caseworkers, and
others). These professionals have often received training in detecting abused
women and children, which suggests that a similar campaign could be
implemented to enhance their ability to detect and report suspected cases of
elder abuse.
     Changes in medical practice related to improved assessment in domes-
tic violence cases include refined standard medical procedures as needed for
domestic violence assessment and improved history taking and assessment
as needed to complement the medical examination (McDonald and Collins,
2000). These efforts have resulted in physicians, nurses, and ancillary
personnel being more skilled in recognizing and reporting relevant cases of
woman or child abuse, and providing medical testimony when needed. In
many communities physicians and nurses have been instrumental in mobi-
lizing resources, supporting shelters, and volunteering their expertise in a
variety of ways.
     With the growing acknowledgment of the magnitude of elder abuse,
medical practitioners have also developed systems to inform doctors and
nurses regarding procedures for examining suspected cases of maltreatment
in elderly patients. Kingston and Penhale (1995), for example, provide a
list of physical findings and risk factors that are related to physical abuse,
sexual abuse, and neglect in elderly patients who come to the attention of
emergency room staff. The need for further expansion in this area has been
recently documented (Institute of Medicine, 2001).
     Although very few psychosocial interventions for elder abuse have been
evaluated, two studies warrant discussion. Scogin and colleagues (1992)
conducted a controlled treatment study designed to assist abusive caregivers,
in which participants received didactic presentations, group discussions,
role-playing, and guided practice. They were compared with caregivers
who did not receive training, based on measures of general mental health,
anger, self-esteem, and degree of burden. Although the program had only a
minor impact on anger and self-esteem, caregivers in the treatment program
reported reduction in personal costs associated with caregiving. An impor-
tant finding was that the no-treatment group experienced an increase in
symptoms of distress while treatment participants experienced a decrease.
     Anetzberger and colleagues (2000) focused their evaluation on an edu-
cational curriculum on issues of elder abuse, cross-training initiatives on
Alzheimer’s disease, and additional materials to aid caregivers in identify-
ing their own risk of abuse and how to access resources. Although the
512                                                  ELDER MISTREATMENT

study lacked a control group, benefits were deduced on the basis of positive
changes in knowledge, attitudes, and behavior of staff that participated.


Coordinated Community Responses
     A number of coordinated programs designed to improve services for
the elderly have emerged in the United States and Canada. These programs
are characterized by efforts to assess overall needs and then integrate them
into a plan that best meets consumer priorities. In most cases, optimal
independent living status is the preferred outcome, which is dependent on
financial, health, and emotional support. To assist in this effort, many
communities have moved toward development of multidisciplinary teams
composed of workers from many different community agencies. These
teams provide consultation on abuse cases and help coordinate and assist
agencies in providing services, especially those that may not be readily
available in the community (Wolf, 1992). This approach is modeled after
interagency domestic violence task force teams, which serve as the means
by which various relevant players (e.g., legal services, child protection,
shelters, service providers, and educators) can communicate and solve prob-
lems.
     A program described by Adele Weiner of Long Island University illus-
trates a coordinated approach for elderly victims in a large urban area
(Weiner, 1991). Her program brought together representatives from sev-
eral resources, including health care professionals, community leaders, reli-
gious groups, and families with elderly members. A series of workshops
and consultation/referrals served as the means for training the participants
in identifying and preventing elder abuse, and in providing them with infor-
mation regarding the availability of services. Although not all the project’s
goals were realized, Weiner’s experiences serve as a practical guide to the
problems one might encounter in developing such programs, especially in
urban communities.
     The multiservice program by the San Francisco Consortium for the
Prevention of Elder Abuse represents another state-of-the-art approach to
dealing with this problem. A team consisting of representatives from the
major service entities meets once every month to review and assess elder
abuse cases that involve a coordinated combination of needs. Professionals
from case management, family counseling, mental health, geriatrics, civil
law, law enforcement, financial management, and adult protective services
organize an integrated plan for assisting even the most difficult cases. Al-
though the benefits of this and similar programs have not been scientifically
evaluated, the advantages to such a systematic approach are evident and
may serve as a model for other communities (Goldman Institute on Aging,
2001).
LESSONS FROM CHILD ABUSE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE                            513

Contributions from Child Abuse and Domestic Violence
Offender Treatment: Child Abuse. Psychosocial interventions with re-
ported maltreating parents developed gradually from an individual-focused
pathology model to a more encompassing ecological model, with an evolv-
ing emphasis on the importance of the parent-child relationship and its
context. Simultaneously, the orientation toward treatment shifted gradu-
ally away from a deviance viewpoint and more toward one that accounts
for the vast number of stress factors that impinge on the developing parent-
child relationship (Wolfe, 1999). This shift toward a more contextual
theory of maltreatment places greater emphasis on the importance of pro-
moting parental competence and reducing the burden of stress on families.
     Although intervention models have greatly improved and have contrib-
uted to encouraging gains in treatment outcomes, the field remains split
between promising research findings and the realities of child protection
and welfare. Unfortunately, the dominant theme in most services to mal-
treating families remains that of protection, not treatment (Azar and Wolfe,
1998). This conundrum leaves inadequate services available to the larger
number of parents who are at risk of child abuse or neglect and who could
benefit the most from early intervention. Nonetheless, important strides
have been made in ways to reduce child abuse and neglect among high-risk
samples of parents and children. Most relevant to elder abuse intervention
is the finding that multileveled programs, that is, programs offering addi-
tional services tailored to individual and family needs over time, are worth
the additional effort and expense, compared to less intensive services.
     Early methods of treatment for physical abuse (e.g., lay counseling,
psychotherapy, and provisions of support services) were too narrow in
scope to produce changes in the disturbed family interaction patterns that
are central to child abuse and neglect. By the late 1970s, national evalua-
tion studies indicated high recidivism rates both during and after treatment
(Cohn, 1979; Herrenkohl et al., 1979), which prompted strategies that
targeted child-rearing attitudes, skill deficiencies, and anger control. Inter-
vention techniques for the kinds of deficits exhibited by physically abusive
families were modified for this population on the basis of well-developed
behavioral training methods, such as child management skills training, stress
and anger management training, and cognitive restructuring approaches
(Wolfe, 1999).
     Based on an awareness that child abuse may arise from poor parental
preparation and assistance, especially in the early years, intervention strat-
egies for physical abuse have emphasized education, training, and resources
for at-risk families and community service providers, as well as direct assis-
tance to caregivers to reduce stress, anger, and similar issues. Evaluations
of interventions for child physical abuse and neglect indicate that cognitive-
514                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

behavioral approaches are the most widely supported methods for assisting
maltreating parents (Corcoran, 2000; Hansen et al., 1998). These methods
are effective (relative to standard protective-service interventions involving
brief counseling and monitoring) in modifying parental behaviors that are
most relevant to child maltreatment, such as appropriate child-rearing and
self-control skills. Techniques such as relaxation and self-management
skills training, cognitive restructuring (viewing child behavior more appro-
priately), problem-solving training, and stress and anger management train-
ing are often combined with structured training in basic child-rearing skills.
These methods, either singly or combined, have been successful at teaching
coping and problem-solving skills to abusive as well as neglectful parents
(Fantuzzo et al., 1986; Kolko, 1996; Wolfe and Wekerle, 1993). Regard-
less of these advances in treatment, however, the prevailing view for pre-
venting child abuse and neglect is to act earlier rather than later.

Offender Treatment: Woman Abuse. Counseling centers for abusive men
are now regarded as an important addition to community services for
domestic violence. Offender treatment programs originated in the early
1970s as voluntary programs for men whose partners were seeking the aid
of shelter services. In recent years, the criminal justice system has been
making increasing use of treatment programs for sentencing men arrested
for assaulting their partners. Currently, an average of 80 percent of clients
in such programs are referred by probation officers or are attending treat-
ment due to a court mandate (Scott and Wolfe, 2000). Many of these
programs use group approaches that encourage participants to take respon-
sibility for their behavior and to find new ways to relate to their partners
and to any children involved. The central characteristics of these programs
involve accepting responsibility for one’s behavior (in contrast to blaming
victims), confrontation from other batterers familiar with evasion and de-
nial, challenging attitudes and behaviors that promote male dominance and
sexist values, and training in self-control and alternative approaches to
dealing with anger, stress, and frustration.
     Intervention for abusive men is usually conducted in small groups that
emphasize pro-feminist explanations for partner violence and use cognitive-
behavioral or psychotherapeutic techniques to bring about change. Al-
though the overall effectiveness of these efforts is still a matter of debate,
existing studies endorse their efficacy over alternative models, such as treat-
ment for drug abuse, one-on-one psychotherapy, insight therapy, etc., espe-
cially if these alternative approaches do not require the man to accept
responsibility for his behavior or if he remains unaccountable for his ac-
tions. However, the major limitation of these new programs is that most
men refuse to participate unless court-ordered. Moreover, even those who
do make an initial inquiry on their own, or are court-mandated, rarely
LESSONS FROM CHILD ABUSE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE                             515

continue to complete the entire program once the crisis has passed or the
court’s authority has been withdrawn (drop-out rates for batterer treatment
programs vary from 20 to 80 percent, depending on how rates are calcu-
lated; see Scott and Wolfe, 2000). Even those men who are court-ordered
to attend treatment drop out at rates similar to voluntary clients. More-
over, among the few evaluations of batterer intervention programs judged
to be methodologically sound, small and generally nonsignificant differ-
ences are found in recidivism rates of those who attend intervention and
those who do not. Approximately one-third of men participating in various
programs re-assault in the year following intervention (32 percent to 39
percent re-assault rates; see Gondolf, 1998).

Coordinated Community Response. The domestic violence movement
sparked innovative programs, such as support and advocacy services, which
elder abuse efforts have begun to emulate. Importantly, domestic violence
intervention models adhere to the belief that victims or potential victims
should not be treated as patients, but rather should be empowered through
supportive groups, advocacy in the legal system, and awareness of the
entire range of options available (Jaffe et al., 1996). Furthermore, advo-
cacy initiatives maintain that the least restrictive and intrusive interventions
should be applied to an older person’s situation. In practice, advocates
advise clients of their rights and alternative services available and can assist
in carrying out plans. An important feature of advocacy is the advocate’s
independence of any formal delivery system, which allows him or her to
establish a positive relationship. Studies suggest that when victims have
advocates they report less social isolation, are better linked to community
services, achieve more goals, and are less likely to suffer abuse (Filinson,
1999). Nonetheless, many older adults may not know how to act on the
rights they now understand they have and may not get the assistance they
deserve.
     A systems-based response to violence against women and children may
be of direct benefit to prevention initiatives regarding elder abuse. Each of
these issues carries the added complexity of involving not only multiple
social service organizations but also other systems such as health care,
criminal justice, education, and government, religious, and business organi-
zations. A principal component of such initiatives in domestic violence is a
well-developed and coordinated community response, involving commu-
nity-wide efforts to bring together relevant stakeholders to respond to do-
mestic violence comprehensively. A coordinated community response typi-
cally involves a coordinating council, with the goal of enhancing the
response by reducing fragmentation and facilitating a shared vision among
community members. These councils often consist of representatives from
service systems organizations involved in child abuse or woman abuse.
516                                                   ELDER MISTREATMENT

One of the benefits of such coordinating councils is to encourage exchange
among persons throughout the community and working in different organi-
zations and settings, as well as developing more highly integrated service
delivery systems and enhancing communication (Sullivan and Allen, 2001).


                       Conclusions and Implications
     Although the field of elder abuse clearly lacks scientific evaluations of
effective interventions, several implications may be drawn from interven-
tion studies involving child abuse and domestic violence. First, there is
evidence to suggest that interventions aimed at assisting caregivers in their
important role hold promise for this population. Interventions that have
been successfully used with abusive parents, in particular, have a clear
parallel to elder abuse. Importantly, both forms of abuse emerge in the
context of a dependency relationship, whereby the caregiver must learn
about and respond appropriately to the needs and demands of the depen-
dent child or adult. Cognitive-behavioral methods addressing misunder-
standings about the reasons for a child’s behavior, misattributions, and
limited knowledge of normal development, for example, have been particu-
larly successful with abusive parents and would likely apply to elder abuse
caregivers as well.
     In addition, there is converging evidence supporting the utility and
acceptance of certain interventions for elder abuse, based largely on clinical
reports, uncontrolled studies, and practitioner surveys. Based on profes-
sional consensus, Nahmiash and Reis (2000) conclude that the most suc-
cessful strategies involve concrete services such as nursing care and home-
making assistance, followed by empowerment strategies such as support
groups, education, and volunteer buddy/advocates (e.g., Hiatt and Jones,
2000). Moreover, similar to abusive parents discussed above, caregiver
abusers require individual supportive counseling to reduce anxiety, stress,
and depression, as well as education and training concerning care of the
elderly. These valuable clinical impressions and accepted practices from the
field point to areas of important intervention priorities and evaluation.
     The intervention literature for caregivers of older adults with dementia
offers further insights into promising psychosocial interventions. Although
these studies do not, for the most part, focus on elder abuse populations,
they provide valuable guidance on ways in which caregivers can be helped
to minimize their distress and presumably decrease the likelihood of elder
abuse. In a recent review, Schulz and colleagues (2001) concluded that
caregiver intervention studies show promise of achieving clinically signifi-
cant outcomes in improving depressive symptoms and reducing anxiety,
anger, and hostility, symptoms that have been causally linked to various
forms of domestic violence. As in the child abuse literature, intervention
LESSONS FROM CHILD ABUSE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE                           517

methods with nonabusive but stressed adult caregiver populations include a
variety of educational and psychotherapeutic interventions such as problem
solving, coping skills training, behavior management training, support
groups, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and other types of counseling. In
general, caregivers of adults with aging impairments are likely to benefit
from enhanced knowledge about the disease, the caregiving role, and re-
sources available. Caregivers may also benefit from training in general
problem-solving skills and specific anger-management skills related to their
role (Schulz et al., 2001).


                   EDUCATION AND PREVENTION
    Similar to child abuse and woman abuse, prevention of elder abuse
focuses on educational initiatives, which are believed to be critical elements
in any comprehensive approach to domestic violence. These strategies have
focused on education of older adults concerning their rights and how to
seek help, as well as educating professionals, caregivers, and the general
public regarding the nature of elder abuse and its prevention.


                           Educating the Elderly
     Educating older adults provides them with knowledge as to how to
protect themselves and their rights, which contributes to feelings of in-
creased control and self-efficacy. Some communities offer support and
problem-solving assistance as an adjunct to broader education strategies.
For example, Project Care in Montreal incorporates both individual and
group support to empower clients (Reis and Nahmiash, 1995). This pro-
gram involves volunteer “buddies” who meet regularly with abused seniors
on a one-to-one basis, in an effort to reduce social isolation and inform
seniors of their rights. In addition, the program offers an empowerment
group that meets weekly to help victims discuss feelings and brainstorm
ways of dealing with specific problems they are encountering. Similar
strategies have been used in other cities (Wolf and Pillemer, 1994).
     Similar to child sexual abuse prevention initiatives that teach children
about safety and protection (Wolfe et al., 1995), education programs for
seniors have also attempted to make them active players in the development
and day-to-day operation of their services. Seniors can be assisted in reduc-
ing abuse in a number of ways, including professional recognition of their
contributions, collaboration between seniors and professionals, generating
their interest and commitment, ensuring a meaningful experience, brain-
storming, using seniors as advisers, and central coordination (ARA Con-
sulting Group, Inc., 1994). Moreover, significant progress has been made
to increase professional awareness and involvement through training ses-
518                                                    ELDER MISTREATMENT

sions and seminars on abuse, with the specific aim of examining bias or
fears concerning treatment of the elderly among staff and administration
(McDonald and Collins, 2000).


               Educating Caregivers and the General Public
     Because caregivers’ stress has been implicated as a risk factor of abuse
and neglect of the elderly, education and training programs are seen as a
vital aspect in prevention. Available in most communities, such programs
offer mutual support, stress reduction, and problem-solving strategies. The
underlying assumption is that some social support and education/training
works to reduce the likelihood that anger, aggression, and conflict will
emerge in the caregiving relationship (Schulz et al., 2001).
     Public education campaigns geared toward seniors as well as those in
positions to assist have been implemented in recent years. These include a
wide variety of pamphlets on the topic of advocacy for resources, lobbying
activities, public media, and conferences. Coalitions consisting of service
providers have also been established to educate community members about
other abuse issues. Moreover, some communities are attempting to develop
preventive programs to teach children to respect older adults and create
opportunities for intergenerational relationships (Podnieks and Baillie,
1995). Others have taken the lead by offering public educational efforts,
such as billboards, TV commercials, and newspaper ads, informing families
of the necessity to provide care and support to seniors living at home.
Nonprofit corporations or health care facilities that serve a geriatric popu-
lation typically sponsor these efforts. Although formal evaluation is lack-
ing, these efforts base their support on the success of similar initiatives in
the fields of child abuse and domestic violence, described below.


              Child Abuse and Domestic Violence Initiatives
    Child abuse prevention has been approached through both universal
efforts (e.g., educating the general public about its various signs; learning
healthy childrearing skills) and more selected and targeted approaches,
such as efforts to assist young parents who may or may not be at risk of
abuse due to socioeconomic or other factors. An example of selected
prevention that may share some common elements with elder abuse preven-
tion is the recent work of David Olds and his colleagues. This program
seeks to build on persons’ strengths and abilities, rather than their deficits,
and as such is a plausible approach to preventing physical abuse, neglect,
and related social problems in different age groups. The program itself
involves prenatal and postnatal home-visitation services for first-time (un-
der age 19) parents to establish resource linkages and learn about their
LESSONS FROM CHILD ABUSE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE                            519

child’s developmental needs. Fifteen years after receiving these services
these parents maintained gains over controls on important dimensions:
better family planning concerning number and spacing of children, less
need for welfare, less child maltreatment, and fewer arrests of their children
during adolescence (Olds et al., 1997). Although elder abuse clearly in-
volves a different focus and timing of intervention, any of its components fit
with existing knowledge of this issue, such as establishing community link-
ages, supporting families during stressful periods, teaching basic caregiver
skills, and building on strengths of the target adult as well as caregivers and
others.
     Public awareness campaigns, such as public service announcements and
advertisements, have been widely used throughout North America to com-
bat child abuse and domestic violence. These campaigns are usually di-
rected at recognizing the warning signs of such violence, as well as special-
ized community resources such as shelters for abused women. The Family
Violence Prevention Fund (FVPF) in collaboration with the Advertising
Council (Klein et al., 1997) developed an illustrative and comprehensive
campaign that included a small research component. The campaign in-
volved television ads with the message, “There is no excuse for abuse,” and
offered local contacts for domestic violence resources. The evaluation
involved public opinion data prior to the campaign in 1992 and follow-up
data gathered between 1994 and 1996. The findings suggest that Ameri-
cans at the time perceived domestic violence as an important social issue
that required state intervention. Of additional interest is the fact that many
Americans excused domestic violence on the basis of alcohol or other cir-
cumstances, and they were uncertain and fearful about how to assist or
intervene if they knew someone experiencing partner violence.


      RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRACTICE AND RESEARCH
     Traditional approaches to child welfare and domestic violence were
largely designed for protection rather than assistance, which leaves inad-
equate services available to a significant number of persons at need and
who could benefit from early intervention. With some important excep-
tions, domestic violence policies related to child, woman, and elder abuse
have focused primarily on identification of offenders, which paradoxically
reduces the chances for assisting the much larger majority of potentially
abusive or inadequate caregivers or partners. That is, if treatment services
are tied to an offence and the individual must be identified and labeled, it is
understandable that many individuals will perceive them as threatening and
undesirable. Moreover, there is often a large gap between what families
need in terms of treatment and what is actually delivered in practice. Help
520                                                     ELDER MISTREATMENT

should be more easily available to a family or individual before a crisis or
tragedy occurs.
     Connected to this strategy of earlier family assistance for all forms of
domestic violence must be the acknowledgment that intervention after the
fact is seldom satisfactory to the individual, the family, or the community.
The realities of adult protection, on the one hand, require firm guidelines
and legal authority. Individual autonomy and special needs, on the other
hand, profit from stability, continuity of caregivers, and a supportive family
and community environment. Unfortunately, by the time official attention
is drawn to the problem (due to the victims or others’ reluctance to seek
help, failure of family members or professionals to identify a burgeoning
problem, offences that fall below the threshold for official response, etc.), it
may be very difficult to reverse some of the patterns that have formed.
     To combat the negative connotation associated with treatment and
prevention services, policy planners need to study ways to make the avail-
able services more attractive to the elderly and those who care for them. As
one illustration, prevention and early intervention efforts based on social
learning theory have shown considerable promise in addressing the contrib-
uting factors related to child abuse; because child and elder abuse share
some fundamental features (e.g., a dependent, caregiving relationship), these
approaches seem well-suited for elder abuse prevention as well.


                            Public Health Models
     Emerging changes in public policy, legislation, and service delivery
illustrate a commitment to finding ways to reduce the prevalence and harm-
ful effects of all forms of domestic violence. Still, strategies that address the
issue at a broader level need to be more fully developed and evaluated.
Such strategies must take into account the large number of factors that
influence the likelihood of elder abuse, as well as factors that promote
proper care and well-being.
     Significantly, there are established precedents for addressing complex
public health issues facing children and adolescents, such as domestic vio-
lence (Wolfe and Jaffe, 2001), substance abuse and peer violence in schools
(Cunningham and Henggeler, 2001; Farrell et al., 2001), and personal
safety and injury prevention (Tremblay and Peterson, 1999). These ap-
proaches, adopted primarily for known health and behavior problems
among youth, hold considerable promise for the elderly as well, because
they recognize that change occurs through finding positive ways to commu-
nicate messages about healthy families and healthy relationships. Alterna-
tives to violence can be activated in each community in a manner that
stimulates interest, informs choices, and promotes action to decrease vio-
lence and abuse in the lives of children, youth, and families.
LESSONS FROM CHILD ABUSE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE                           521

     Implicit throughout this chapter is the presumption that public health
and health promotion approaches to prevention of various forms of domes-
tic violence, including elder abuse and neglect, are promising strategies.
Such strategies should not undermine existing efforts at treatment and early
intervention but rather would be designed to approach the widespread
problem of elder abuse from a broader, more fundamental vantage point.
Government fiscal incentives, for example, should be reoriented to empha-
size prevention and treatment rather than detection, investigation, and al-
ternative placement. A key health promotion policy issue concerns the need
of all families for some degree of support and education (an “enhance-
ment” strategy rather than interception; see Melton and Barry, 1994).
     In conjunction with health promotion efforts, program development
should focus on providing information for caregivers of the elderly that is
easily understood, practical, and accessible to all present and potential
populations. In particular, attention should be directed to societal influ-
ences that play a role in elder abuse and neglect, especially in circumstances
where families are exposed to major effects of poverty, health risks, and
environmental conflict. Such a cross-cultural perspective would redirect
the focus away from individuals and families and explore societal and
cultural conditions that attenuate or exacerbate these problems. In a simi-
lar manner, policy planners need to advocate for the establishment of mini-
mum standards of care for their own communities, taking into account the
cultural diversity of the community and the imbalance in child-care and
elder-care responsibilities on women.


                                SUMMARY
     In sum, the absence of theory-based treatments and outcome research
in the area of elder abuse remains striking. Similar to related family vio-
lence interventions such as child abuse and women abuse programs, exist-
ing elder abuse programs have been largely aimed at individual needs based
on victim accounts of abuse and violence, rather than a theory of change
based on population based epidemiology (Chalk and King, 1998). This
victim response approach has been effective at attracting public attention
and resource commitments, but it is inadequate in terms of providing a
foundation for measurement and evaluation of long-term outcomes or pro-
gram effects.
     Funding for university-based research efforts is indicated to gather in-
formation on ways to address the needs of the elderly, as well as to enhance
caregiver(s) functioning enough to ensure safety and proper care. This
review points to the conclusion that behavioral and cognitive behavioral
approaches show promise as effective means of assisting caregivers and
reducing the stresses of caring for an elderly member. Small- and large-
522                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

scale efforts to validate their effectiveness are needed, as well as work
identifying the families or settings for whom these strategies are most use-
ful. Particularly important would be further development of interventions
aimed at prevention of elder abuse. Finally, evaluation efforts must inves-
tigate the degree to which changes occurred at the community level and the
degree to which such efforts may result in changes in the lives of victims and
other family members. These levels include individual or family level, the
community level, and the state and federal level such as laws and policies
regarding response to violence against women and children (Sullivan and
Allen, 2001).


                                      REFERENCES
Anetzberger, G.J.
   2000      Caregiving: Primary cause of elder abuse? Journal of the American Society on
             Aging 2:46–51.
ARA Consulting Group, Inc.
   1994      Older Canadians and the Abuse of Seniors: A Continuum from Participation to
             Empowerment. Ottawa, ON: Health Canada.
Azar, S., and D. Wolfe
   1998      Treatment of child abuse and neglect. In: Treatment of Childhood Disorders,
             E.J. Mash and R.A. Barkley, eds. New York: Guilford Press.
Bond, J.B., R.L. Penner, and P. Yellen
   1995      Perceived effectiveness of legislation concerning abuse of the elderly: A survey of
             professionals in Canada and the United States. Canadian Journal on Aging 14(2,
             Suppl. 2):118–135.
Brandl, B., and T. Meuer
   2000      Domestic abuse in later life. The Elder Law Journal 8:297–335.
Chalk, R., and P. King
   1998      Assessing family violence interventions. American Journal of Preventive Medi-
             cine 14:289–292.
Cohn, A.H.
   1979      Essential elements of successful child abuse and neglect treatment. Child Abuse
             and Neglect 3:491–496.
Corcoran, J.
   2000      Family interventions with child physical abuse and neglect: A critical review.
             Children and Youth Services Review 22:563–591.
Cunningham, P.B., and S.W. Henggeler
   2001      Implementation of an empirically based drug and violence prevention and inter-
             vention program in public school settings. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology
             30:221–232.
Edleson, J.L.
   1999      The overlap between child maltreatment and woman battering. Violence Against
             Women 5:134–154.
Family Violence Prevention Fund
   1998      Domestic violence advertising campaign tracking survey. San Francisco: Author.
LESSONS FROM CHILD ABUSE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE                                            523

Fantuzzo, J.W., L. Wray, R. Hall, C. Goins, and S.T. Azar
    1986     Parent and social skills training for mentally retarded parents identified as child
             maltreaters. American Journal of Mental Deficiency 91:135–140.
Farrell, A.D., A.L. Meyer, E.M. Kung, and T.N. Sullivan
    2001     Development and evaluation of school-based violence prevention programs. Jour-
             nal of Clinical Child Psychology 30:207–220.
Filinson, R
    1999     Aging 2000: Consumer empowerment through education. Educational Geron-
             tology 25:155–165.
Fluke, J.D., Y.Y. Yuan, and M. Edwards
    1999     Recurrence of maltreatment: An application of the National Child Abuse and
             Neglect Data System (NCANDS). Child Abuse and Neglect 23:633–650.
Goldman Institute on Aging
    2001     San Francisco Consortium for Elder Abuse Prevention. Available: www.gioa.org/
             professional/pro_eap.html.
Gondolf, E.W.
    1998     Do batterer programs work? A 15-month follow-up of multi-site evaluation.
             Domestic Violence Report 3:65–79.
Gordon, A.L.
    2000     What works in child protective services reforms. In What Works in Child Wel-
             fare, M.P. Kluger, G. Alexander, and P.J. Curtis, eds. New York: Child Welfare
             League of America.
Hansen, D.J., J.E. Warner-Rogers, and D.B. Hecht
    1998     Implementing and evaluating an individualized behavioral intervention program
             for maltreating families. In Handbook of Child Abuse Research and Treatment,
             J. R. Lutzker, ed. New York: Plenum.
Harbison, J.
    1999     The changing career of “elder abuse and neglect” as a social problem in Canada:
             Learning from feminist frameworks? Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 11:59–
             80.
Herrenkohl, R.C., E.C Herrenkohl, B.P. Egolf, and M. Seech
    1979     The repetition of child abuse: How frequently does it occur? Child Abuse and
             Neglect 3:67–72.
Hiatt, S., and A. Jones
    2000     Volunteer services for vulnerable families and at-risk elderly. Child Abuse and
             Neglect 24:141–148.
Hollinshead, D., and J. Fluke
    2000     What works in safety and risk assessment for child protective services. In What
             Works in Child Welfare, M.P. Kluger, G. Alexander, and P.A. Curtis, eds. New
             York: Child Welfare League of America.
Hotch, D.
    1994     Identification, Assessment, Care, Referral, and Follow-up of Women Experienc-
             ing Domestic Violence Who Come to the Emergency Department for Treatment.
             Ottawa, ON: Health Canada, Family Violence Prevention Division.
Institute of Medicine
    2001     Confronting Chronic Neglect: The Education and Training of Health Care Pro-
             fessionals on Family Violence. F. Cohn, M.E. Salmon, and J.D. Stobo, eds.
             Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Jaffe, P., N. Lemon, J. Sandler, and D. Wolfe
    1996     Working Together to End Domestic Violence. Tampa, FL: Mancorp.
524                                                               ELDER MISTREATMENT

Kingston, P., and B. Penhale
   1995       Elder abuse and neglect: issues in the accident and emergency department. Acci-
              dent and Emergency Nursing 3:122–128.
Klein, E., J. Campbell, E. Soler, and M. Chez
   1997       Ending Domestic Violence. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Kolko, D.J.
   1996       Individual cognitive behavioral treatment and family therapy for physically abused
              children and their offending parents: A comparison of clinical outcomes. Child
              Maltreatment 1:322–342.
Kozma, A., and M.J. Stones
   1995       Issues in the measurement of elder abuse. In Abuse and Neglect of Older Canadi-
              ans: Strategies for Change, M. J. Maclean, ed. Toronto, ON: Thompson.
Macolini, R.M.
   1995       Elder abuse policy: Considerations in research and legislation. Behavioral Sci-
              ences and the Law 13(3):349–363.
McDonald, L.
   1996       Abuse and neglect of elders. In Encyclopedia of Gerontology: Age, Aging, and
              the Aged, J.E. Birren, ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
McDonald, L., and A. Collins
   2000       Abuse and Neglect of Older Adults: A Discussion Paper. Ottawa. ON: Health
              Canada.
Melton, G.B.
   1990       Child protection: Making a bad situation worse? Contemporary Psychology
              35:213–214.
Melton, G.B., and F.D. Barry
   1994       Neighbors helping neighbors: The vision of the U. S. Advisory Board on Child
              Abuse and Neglect. In Protecting Children from Abuse and Neglect: Founda-
              tions for a New National Strategy, G.B. Melton, and F.D. Barry, eds.. New
              York: Guilford Press.
Mulligan, S.
   1990       A Handbook for the Prevention of Family Violence. Ottawa, ON: Health and
              Welfare Canada.
Nahmiash, D., and M. Reis
   2000       Most successful intervention strategies for abused older adults. Journal of Elder
              Abuse and Neglect 12(1).
Olds, D.L., J. Eckenrode, and C. R. Henderson
   1997       Long-term effects of home visitation on maternal life course and child abuse and
              neglect. Journal of the American Medical Association 278:637–643.
Peled, E., P. Jaffe, and J. Edleson
   1995       Ending the Cycle of Violence. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Podnieks, E., and E. Baillie
   1995       Education as the key to the prevention of elder abuse and neglect. In Abuse and
              Neglect of Older Canadians: Strategies for change, M.J. Mclean, ed. Toronto,
              ON: Thompson.
Reis, M., and D. Nahmiash
   1995       When seniors are abused: An intervention model. Gerontologist 35:666–671.
   1998       Validation of the Indicators of Abuse (IOA) screen. Gerontologist 38:471–480.
Schulz, R., A. O’Brien, S. Czaja, M. Ory, R. Norris, and L.M. Martire
   2001       Dementia caregiver intervention research: In search of clinical significance.
              Manuscript submitted for publication.
LESSONS FROM CHILD ABUSE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE                                            525

Scogin, F., B. Stephens, J. Bynum, L. Baumhover, C. Beall, and N.P. Grote
    1992     Emotional correlates of caregiving. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect 4:59–69.
Scott, K.L., and D.A. Wolfe
    2000     What works in the treatment of batterers. In: What Works in Child Welfare,
             M.A. Kluger, G. Alexander, and P A. Curtis, eds. New York: Child Welfare
             League of America.
Sherman, L.W., and R.A. Berk
    1984     The specific deterrent effects of arrest for domestic assault. American Sociologi-
             cal Review 49:261–272.
Sullivan, C.M., and N.E. Allen
    2001     Evaluating coordinated community responses for abused women and their chil-
             dren. In Domestic Violence in the Lives of Children: The Future of Research,
             Intervention, and Social Policy, S.A. Graham-Bermann, and J.L. Edleson, eds.
             Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Tremblay, G.C., and L. Peterson
    1999     Prevention of childhood injury: Clinical and public policy challenges. Clinical
             Psychology Review 19:415–434.
U.S. Advisory Board on Child Abuse and Neglect
    1993     Neighbors Helping Neighbors: A New National Strategy for the Protection of
             Children. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Wald, M.S., J.M. Carlsmith, P.H. Leiderman, C. Smith, and R.D. French
    1988     Protecting Abused and Neglected Children. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
             Press.
Weiner, A.
    1991     A community-based education model for identification and prevention of elder
             abuse. Journal of Gerontological Social Work 16:107–119.
Wolf, R.S.
    1992     Victimization of the elderly: Elder abuse and neglect. Reviews in Clinical Geron-
             tology 2:269-276.
Wolf, R.S., and K. Pillemer
    1994     What’s new in elder abuse programming? Four bright ideas. Gerontologist,
             34:126–129.
Wolfe, D.A.
    1999     Child Abuse: Implications for Child Development and Psychopathology. Thou-
             sand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Wolfe, D.A., and P. Jaffe
    1991     Child abuse and family violence as determinants of child psychopathology. Ca-
             nadian Journal of Behavioural Science 23:282–299.
    2001     Prevention of domestic violence: Emerging initatives. In: Domestic Violence in
             the Lives of Children, S.A. Graham-Bermann and J.L. Edleson, eds. Washington,
             DC: American Psychological Association.
Wolfe, D.A., and C. Wekerle
    1993     Treatment strategies for child physical abuse and neglect: A critical progress
             report. Clinical Psychology Review 13:473–500.
Wolfe, D.A., N.D. Reppucci, and S. Hart
    1995     Child abuse prevention: Knowledge and priorities. Journal of Clinical Child
             Psychology 24:5–22.
                                        Index




                     A                          Administration on Developmental
                                                          Disabilities and Rehabilitation
Abandonment, 36, 184, 188, 199, 216,                      Research, 7, 150, 152
           222, 225, 236, 357                   Adult children of elderly persons, 11, 91,
   screening and case identification, 112-                95, 96-97, 168, 274, 293-302
           113                                            (passim), 401
Abrasions and lacerations, 54, 118, 119,          intergenerational transmission of
           340, 344-345, 359, 360, 361,                   mistreatment, 99
           372, 449, 454                        Adult Protective Service Reports, 167
Abuse, see Child abuse and neglect;             Adult protective services, 6, 22, 23, 24-25,
           Definitional issues; Domestic                  27, 32, 42, 50, 80, 82, 101, 245,
           violence; Emotional abuse;                     332, 505
           Exploitation; Financial abuse;         cost factors, 126, 239
           Self-abuse/self-neglect; Sexual        criminal justice system and, 124-125,
           abuse                                          126, 127-128, 129
Academic research, 6, 13, 60, 139, 521            evaluation of effectiveness, 6, 32, 122,
Acierno, Ronald, 77, 78, 79, 81, 255, 261-                124-127, 139, 506
           302                                    financial abuse, 390, 394, 405(n.25),
Activities of daily living (ADLs), 10, 11, 98             417, 436, 437
   adult protective services, 125                 funding, 14, 126, 239, 240, 418-419
   nursing homes, 452, 479                        gender factors, 96
   residential care facilities, 466, 469, 479     historical perspectives, 13-15, 17, 238-
   screening and case identification, 105,                240, 506
           270-271                                legislation, 27, 28, 115, 124, 181-182,
Administration on Aging, 21-22, 132, 151,                 185, 189, 411-412, 418-419,
           246, 266-267                                   505, 506-507
   National Center on Elder Abuse, 15, 22-        nursing homes and, 456-460
           23, 132, 265-266, 385, 389-390         racial/ethnic factors, 97


                                            527
528                                                                                  INDEX

   reporting practices, 27, 28, 115, 122,       Assessment, see Evaluation of interventions;
           167, 261, 267, 383-384, 411-                    Screening and case identification
           412, 417, 456-460                    Assessment Protocol for Physicians, 365
   residential care facilities, 465             Assisted-living settings, 4-5, 10-11, 62, 64,
   response time, 124, 129-130                             80, 86, 133, 134, 467, 469
   risk factors, 96, 97, 98                     Attitudes, 242, 264, 278-279, 284, 296,
   screening and case identification, 104,                 297, 299, 503
           105-106, 115-116, 124, 167, 261         see also Depression; Emotional abuse;
           267, 277, 365                                   Trust relationships
   self-abuse and neglect, 126-127                 about aging and the elderly, 63, 168,
   theoretical models, 60, 65                              242, 264-265, 271-272, 276,
Advisory Board on Child Abuse and                          296, 299, 400, 406
           Neglect, 16                             financial abuse, 391-392, 396, 399-402,
Advocacy, 14, 15, 17, 130, 136, 239, 251,                  404, 406, 407, 414, 415, 429,
           256, 316, 356, 388, 418, 419,                   438
           422, 423, 429, 430, 489, 490,           long-term care settings, 10, 446-447
           505-506, 516                            screening and case identification, 109,
African Americans, 97, 269, 390-391, 466                   242, 264-265, 271-272, 276,
Age Discrimination in Employment Act, 42                   278-279, 284, 293, 294, 296,
Age factors, 171, 175, 176, 268-269                        299, 396
   attitudes about aging and the elderly, 63,      sexual abuse, 264, 278
           168, 242, 264-265, 271-272,             stigma, 69, 242, 243, 264, 278-279,
           276, 296, 299, 400, 406                         332, 415, 429, 503
   definitional issues, 41-42, 43, 90, 115,     Attorneys, 304
           124, 181-237 (passim), 246              see also Guardianship and power of
   financial abuse, perpetrators, 401                      attorney
   forensics, 341, 344-360 (passim)                financial abuse, 52, 390, 398, 411-412,
   long-term care settings, 447                            413, 423, 433-434
   nursing homes, 452                              reporting of abuse, 52, 123, 390, 411-
   perceptions of behavior, 168                            412, 413
   population, aging of, xiii, 9-10, 78, 152
   screening and case identification, 115,
           294                                                       B
   state legislation, 27, 28, 115, 124, 181-
           182, 185                             Banks and banking, 130, 388, 396, 398,
   vulnerability, general, 41-42, 43                       426
                                                   incidence and prevalence research, 73,
Agency for Healthcare Research and
           Quality, 12, 152                                244
AIDS, 69                                           prevention of abuse, 132, 296, 414, 430,
                                                           431-433, 435, 437
Alabama, 21, 181-182, 394, 424
Alaska, 182                                        reporting practices, 411(n.36), 412, 421
Alcohol abuse, 21, 91, 94, 95, 242, 270,        Bedsores, see Decubiti
                                                Belmont Report, 303-304, 305, 306, 309,
           282, 293, 294, 296, 299, 355,
           357, 398                                        311, 316-318, 319-320, 321,
Alzheimer’s disease, see Dementia                          327, 334
                                                Benjamin Rose Institute, 239
American College of Emergency Response,
           170                                  Biomarkers, 3, 23, 74, 84, 101-102, 340,
American Medical Association (AMA), 104,                   360-362
                                                Blacks, see African Americans
           109, 342, 365, 402
Arizona, 183, 433                               Blenkner, Margaret, 239, 243
Arkansas, 183-184                               Block grants, 14
INDEX                                                                                   529

Board and care homes, see Residential care      Case management, 4-5, 105-106, 116, 277
          facilities                               see also Screening and case identification
Brief Abuse Screen for the Elderly, 100-111,    Center for Mental Health Services, 152
          366                                   Centers for Disease Control and Protection
Bruises, 20, 49, 54, 114, 116, 117, 119,                   (CDC), 80, 306-307
          120, 127, 166, 183, 186, 216,         Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
          340, 342-343, 345-347, 454                       (CMS), 152, 448, 457-459, 460-
Bureau of Justice Statistics, 268                          462, 479
Burns, 20, 54, 119, 120, 166, 183, 186,            see also Health Care Financing
          216, 226, 340, 343, 353-354,                     Administration (HCFA)
          371-372                                  Medicaid, 128, 134, 448, 451, 457, 466,
                                                           479
                                                   Medicare, 294, 448, 451, 456-457
                     C                          Child abuse and neglect, 126, 277-281,
                                                           339-340
California, 127, 184-185
                                                   cognitive status of children, 116-117,
Canada                                                     404-406
   financial abuse, 390, 394                       community-level factors, 16, 126, 505,
   incidence and prevalence, 74, 390
                                                           510-516
   legislation, 506                                criminal justice system, 116-117, 280-
Caregiver abuse and neglect, xiii, 7, 11, 15,              281, 507
           17, 26, 30, 33, 42, 44, 122, 240
                                                   financial abuse models, 402-408
   see also Assisted-living settings;              forensics, 339-340, 360-361
           Institutional settings; Long-term       historical perspectives, 12-13, 14, 16-17,
           care settings; Medical
                                                           18-19, 126, 339, 383, 501, 506
           interventions; Nurses and               hospitals, 503, 504
           nursing; Nursing homes;                 incidence and prevalence research, 13,
           Restraints; Trust relationships
                                                           277-281, 287
   Alzheimer’s patients, 10, 92, 93-95             informed consent, 143
   child abuse model, 403                          intergenerational transmission of
   definitional issues, 1, 39, 40-41, 44, 49,
                                                           mistreatment, 99
           51-53, 61, 181-237 (passim), 342        international perspectives, 13, 506
   ethical issues, research, 322, 333-334          isolation, 35, 36, 52, 56, 448, 450
       informed consent, 143, 147-148,
                                                   legislation, 13, 14, 506, 507-510
           311, 314-315, 333-334                   LONGSCAN, 329, 330, 331, 333
   financial, 40-41, 65, 385, 388, 395,            public education, 267-268, 505, 517-
           397-400, 435-436
                                                           518
   forensics, 342, 343-381 (passim)                reporting practices, 13, 123, 329(n.6),
   incidence and prevalence, 73, 74, 76,                   330
           261, 270-273
                                                   research ethics, 143, 315-316, 329-331,
   respite care, 93, 94-95, 125, 130, 270                  333
   risk factors, 93-95, 98-103                     research methodology, general, xiii-xiv,
   screening and case identification, 104-
                                                           18-19, 23, 26-27, 245, 262-263,
           120, 166-167, 242, 270, 271-                    267, 268
           277, 293-302 (passim), 504-505          risk factors, 88, 91, 99, 103, 242, 503-
       institutional staff, 100, 134-135,
                                                           504
           490, 504-505                            screening and case identification, 116-
   theoretical models, 61, 63, 64-65, 69-70                117, 119, 267, 273, 403-404,
Caregiver Abuse Screen (CAS), 112-113,
                                                           503-505
           271                                     sentinel reports, 267, 268
Case-control studies, see Controlled studies
530                                                                                   INDEX

Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act,           state legislation, 35, 36, 184, 405, 406
            13                                      theoretical models, 66, 70
Children, adult, see Adult children of           Cohort studies, see Longitudinal studies
            elderly persons; Household           Colleges and universities, see Academic
            settings                                        research
Civil justice interventions, 28, 32, 130, 131,   Colorado, 186-187
            134, 145, 221, 251, 255, 324,        Common Rule, see Federal Policy for the
            341, 342, 343, 362, 374, 421,                   Protection of Human Subjects
            423-429                              Community Based Education Model for
Clinical practices and research, 4, 5, 25, 45,              Identification and Prevention of
            334-381                                         Elder Abuse, 277
   see also Ethical issues; Forensics;           Community-level factors, 2, 3, 4, 7, 24, 91,
            Medical interventions; Screening                122, 151, 170, 522
            and case identification                 see also Adult protective services;
   guidelines for measurement, 45, 144                      Assisted-living settings; Criminal
   incidence and prevalence of                              justice system; Families and
            mistreatment, 71, 76                            households; Hospitals; Local
   measures of mistreatment, table, 166-                    government
            167                                     child protection, 16, 126, 505, 510-516
Coalition of Advocates for the Rights and           domestic violence, 505, 510, 510-516
            Interest of the Elderly (CARIE),        evaluation of interventions, 122, 128
            136-137, 489                            financial abuse, 430-432, 436
Cognitive impairments, 6, 14, 76, 125, 169,         incidence and prevalence data, xiii, 71,
            262-263, 264, 340                               80, 86, 87
   see also Dementia; Guardianship and              interdisciplinary approaches, 131-132
            power of attorney, 76, 83, 270-         professional specialization and
            272, 273, 284                                   collaboration, 130-133
   child abuse, general, 404-406                    screening and case identification, 104,
   child abuse witnesses, 116-117                           106, 107, 109, 114, 115
   definitional issues, 35, 36, 50, 406          Competence With Compassion, 136-137
   financial abuse, 391-392, 393, 395, 396,      Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and
            397, 404-406, 407, 413, 421,                    Control Act, 145-146
            422, 433-434, 435, 438               Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment, 364
   forensics, 343, 354-357, 360, 366-367,        Computer applications, 169, 170
            371-372                                 financial abuse, 392, 395, 398, 431
   incidence and prevalence research, 76,           forensics, 362
            83, 270-272, 273, 284, 286, 287,        OSCAR database, 457, 471, 476-477,
            451                                             478
   informed consent, 6, 140, 141-143, 309-          residential care databases, 471, 476-477,
            311, 312, 314-317                               478
   long-term care settings, 446, 451, 452,          screening and case identification, 108-
            465, 466, 467, 482                              109
   medications, effects of, 264, 406(n.29)          telephone interviews, 281, 283, 285-286,
   nursing homes, 451, 452, 482                             287
   prospective studies, 90-91                    Confidentiality, 33, 83, 145-147, 304, 308-
   recall problems, 90-91, 264                              309, 312, 323-324, 328, 329-
   residential care facilities, 465, 466, 467,              330, 334, 411
            482                                  Confinement, see Isolation and confinement;
   screening and case identification, 76, 83,               Restraints
            105, 109, 114, 116-117, 270-         Conflicts Tactics Scale (CTS), 20, 26-27,
            272, 273, 284, 314, 366-367,                    55, 85, 166-167, 244, 271, 274-
            396, 397                                        275, 300-302
INDEX                                                                                     531

Connecticut, 187                                   protective orders, 418, 425
Connolly, Marie-Therese, 255-256, 339-381          reporting practices, 123, 267-269, 279
Controlled studies, 2, 25, 72, 90, 91, 168,        screening and case identification, 104,
           174                                            105-106, 115, 116-117, 127-128
   abuser dependency, 96, 241                      theoretical models, 65
   adult protective services, 239                  witnesses, 116-117, 127-128, 129-130,
   alcohol abuse, 95                                      421
   disabled persons, 98-99                      Cross-sectional studies, 72, 169
   household settings, 137-138                  Cultural factors, see Sociocultural factors
   screening and case identification, 110-
           111
Cost factors, xiii, 286                                               D
   see also Funding
   adult protective services, 126, 239          Deaths, see Fatalities
   community-level programs, 510                Decubiti, 340, 343, 348, 349-350, 360, 372
                                                Definitional issues, 3, 30, 34-59, 61, 133,
   evaluation of interventions, 121, 126
   financial abuse, legal interventions, 422,              150, 238, 244, 245, 384, 448-
           429, 434-435                                    450
                                                   age factors, 41-42, 43, 90, 115, 124,
   incidence and prevalence data, 80, 265,
           282, 286, 287                                   181-237 (passim), 246
   interventions, general, 18, 282, 286,           caregiver abuse and neglect, general, 1,
                                                           39, 40-41, 44, 49, 51-53, 61,
           287, 510
   interviews, 18, 282, 286, 287, 510                      181-237 (passim), 342
   research ethics, evaluation, 313, 321,          cognitive impairments, 35, 36, 50, 406
                                                   disabled persons, 35, 36, 37, 50, 188
           322
   residential care facilities, 467                elder mistreatment, general, 1, 2, 4, 19-
   risk factors and, 89                                    21, 30, 73, 108, 114-115
                                                   emotional abuse, 28, 35, 36, 54-55, 448,
   screening and case identification, 104,
           106, 120, 267, 282                              449
   sentinel reports, 267                           epidemiology, 72, 73, 75-77, 85, 87,
                                                           266, 278, 280
Criminal justice system, 15, 28, 55, 245-
           246                                     ethics, research, 306, 307, 308, 310
   see also Forensics; Legislation; Police         expert judgment, 45-47
                                                   families, 35, 36, 181-237 (passim), 244-
   adult protective services and, 124-125,
           126, 127-128, 129                               246
   child abuse, 116-117, 280-281, 507              forensics, 341, 342, 343, 344, 364
                                                   harm, general, 1, 3, 28, 34, 39, 40
   evaluation of, 32, 122, 127-128, 129-
           130, 131                                    guidelines for measurement, 48, 53-
   Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),                  55, 56-58
                                                   institutional settings, general, 35, 36, 37,
           268, 269, 284, 285-286
   financial abuse, 392, 393, 400, 411-412,                187-188, 194, 196, 201, 202,
           420-423                                         209, 214, 215, 217, 218, 220,
                                                           221, 222, 223, 225-226, 233,
   historical perspectives, 15, 240, 506
   incidence and prevalence research, 71,                  235
           77, 261, 264, 267-269, 280, 284,        isolation and confinement, 35, 36, 181-
                                                           237 (passim)
           287
   institutional inspections, 137                  medications, 35, 52, 56, 81
   police, 16, 21, 60, 73, 81, 93, 104, 122,       mental illness, 50
                                                   neglect, 19, 20-21, 34-37 (passim), 39,
           123, 125, 127, 129, 131, 138,
           269, 282, 341, 422                              41, 44, 181-237 (passim), 342,
   professional education, 127-131                         449-450
                                                       guidelines for measurement, 44, 56
           (passim)
532                                                                                   INDEX

   older person, 47-48, 50, 343                     incidence of mistreatment, xiii, 73, 86,
   operational, 42-45, 47-59, 75, 108                       266, 269
   protective factors, 48, 49, 50, 58               nursing homes, 452
   psychological factors, 50, 448                   residential care facilities, 465
   residential care facilities, 4, 465, 475      Denmark, 74
   risk factors, 5, 20-21, 35, 72, 89            Department of Health and Human Services
       guidelines for measurement, 48, 49-                  (DHHS), 304
           50, 58, 81-82, 85                        see also Administration on Aging
   screening and case identification, 108,          Agency for Healthcare Research and
           114-115, 266, 278                                Quality, 12, 152
   self-abuse and neglect, 35, 36, 40, 41,          Centers for Disease Control and
           81                                               Protection (CDC), 80, 306-307
       guidelines for measurement, 44               Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
   sexual abuse, 35, 49, 183-237 (passim),                  Services (CMS), 152, 448, 457-
           280, 281                                         459, 460-462, 479
   state legislation, 13, 28, 34-39, 44, 60,        ethical issues, research,
           181-237, 384, 385, 400                       confidentiality, 33, 145, 146-147,
   strangers, abuse by, 35, 40, 44, 52                      323
   trust relationships, 39, 40-41, 43, 44,              Federal Policy for the Protection of
           61, 238, 384-385                                 Human Subjects (Common Rule),
       guidelines for measurement, 44, 47-                  304, 305, 306, 307-309, 312,
           48, 51-53, 57                                    314, 319, 323, 325-326, 332,
   vulnerability, general, 39, 41-42, 43, 50,               334
           182-237 (passim), 246-247                    informed consent, 149, 315, 316(n.4)
Dehydration, 119, 166, 183, 186, 272, 340,          Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
           351-352, 372, 448, 463                           140, 307-308
Delaware, 187-188                                   forensics, 341, 363
Dementia, 126, 152, 168, 175, 516-517               Health Care Financing Administration
   see also Guardianship and power of                       (HCFA), 152, 448, 457-459
           attorney                                 National Institute on Aging (NIA), 2, 6-
   financial guardianship, 53                               7, 11, 12, 24-25, 95, 144, 149,
   forensics, 355, 356-357, 362-363, 366                    150, 151, 243, 483
   incidence and prevalence and, 10, 246,           National Institutes of Health (NIH), 12
           262, 270, 276, 286, 451, 452                 confidentiality, 33, 145, 146-147
   nursing homes, 451, 452, 482, 485, 486               informed consent, 149
   research, informed consent, 6, 140, 141-         nursing homes, 457, 479
           143                                      Office of the Assistant Secretary for
   residential care facilities, 469, 482                    Planning and Evaluation, 3, 479-
   risk factors, 92, 93-94, 451                             480
   screening and case identification, 114,       Department of Justice, 132, 151
           116-117, 270, 276, 277, 366              Bureau of Justice Statistics, 268
   theoretical models, 66                           forensics, 341
Demographic factors, 168                            National Institute of Justice, 7, 131,
   see also Geographic factors; Marriage                    137-138, 150
           and marital status; Race/ethnicity;   Department of Veterans’ Affairs, 431
           Rural areas; Sociocultural factors;   Depression, 54, 64, 66, 69, 94-95, 100,
           Socioeconomic status; Urban                      117, 242, 243, 366
           areas                                    financial abuse, 392
   adult children, 11                               forensics, 355, 357, 362-363, 366
   aging of general population, xiii, 9-10,      Descriptive studies, 27, 44, 53, 55, 87, 168-
           78, 152                                          177 (passim), 359, 365, 371
INDEX                                                                                      533

Detection and Treatment of Elderly Abuse           Dresser, Rebecca, 140, 141, 148, 256, 303-
           and Neglect, 277                                  338
Diagnosis, see Forensics; Screening and case       Drug abuse, see Substance abuse
           identification                          Drugs, see Medications
Disabled persons, 7, 11, 42, 97-98, 100-           Duress, see Undue influence and duress
           101, 150, 171, 241-242                  Dyer, Carmel Bitondo, 79, 256, 339-381
   see also Activities of daily living (ADLs);
           Cognitive impairments; Dementia;
           Long-term care settings; Nursing                             E
           homes
   definitional issues, 35, 36, 37, 50, 188        Economic factors, 16
   emotional abuse, 28                                see also Cost factors; Financial abuse;
                                                              Funding; Socioeconomic status
   evaluation of interventions, 124
   financial abuse, 391-392, 395, 401, 406,           incidence and prevalence research, 79,
           409, 422, 435                                      81-82, 87, 270, 280
                                                      institutional mistreatment, 66, 67
   forensics, 343
   incidence and prevalence, 10, 11, 264,             research ethics, 313, 321, 322
           265, 270-271, 285                          status inequality, theoretical models, 61,
                                                              62, 63, 64, 241
   residential care facilities, 465, 466
   screening and case identification, 109,            theoretical models, other, 66, 67
           114, 117, 270-271, 294                     victim compensation, 130, 419-420
                                                   Education and training, see Professional
   state law, 35, 36, 37, 124, 181-237
   theoretical models, 64, 70                                 education; Public education
Diagnostic and Treatment Guidelines on             Elder Abuse Attitudes and Behavior
                                                              Intention Scale, 276
           Elder Abuse and Neglect (AMA),
           104, 109                                Elder Abuse Detection Indicators, 277
Diseases and disorders, 11, 97-98                  Elder Abuse Screening Test, see Hwalek-
                                                              Sengstock Elder Abuse Screening
   see also Dementia; Disabled persons;
           Fatalities; Forensics; Long-term                   Test (HSEAST)
           care settings; Medical interventions;   Elder Assessment Instrument (EAI), 112-
                                                              113, 166-167, 272, 294-295, 365
           Mental illness; Nursing homes
   AIDS, 69                                        Emergency departments/response services,
   financial abuse, 399, 409                                  23-24, 170, 243
                                                      committee recommendations, 6, 139
   geriatric syndrome, 89-90
   historical perspectives, 14, 61, 69                evaluation of effectiveness, 124, 128,
   incidence and prevalence of                                139
                                                      financial abuse reporting, 416(n.39)
           mistreatment and, 10, 76, 79, 81
   religious/spiritual treatment, state law,          incidence and prevalence data, 79, 471,
           35, 200, 202, 204, 206, 214, 220,                  472-473
                                                      reporting practices, 472-473
           228, 236
   residential care facilities, 471                   screening and case identification, 107,
   screening and case identification, 105,                    109
                                                   Emotional abuse, 3
           108, 109, 117
   theoretical models, 61, 66, 68, 69                 see also Isolation and confinement
District of Columbia, 189                             definitional issues, 28, 35, 36, 54-55,
                                                              448, 449
Domestic violence, 15, 501-522
   see also Child abuse and neglect;                  financial abuse, impacts of, 391, 392,
           Families and households; Intimate                  399, 409
                                                      forensics, 340
           partner mistreatment; Marriage
           and marital status                         incidence and prevalence, 74, 275, 284,
   intergenerational transmission of                          451, 454-455
                                                      institutional settings, general, 99
           mistreatment, 99
534                                                                                    INDEX

   nursing homes, 448, 449, 451, 454-455,          institutional review boards (IRBs), 304,
           462                                             308-309, 313, 319-321, 323-324,
   research ethics, 322                                    331
   screening and case identification, 105,             informed consent, 142, 143, 148-
           109, 110-111, 117, 166-167,                     149, 304, 316(n.4), 317-319, 323
           275, 295, 296                           interviews, 311, 312, 323
   social embarrassment, 57, 339-340               National Bioethics Advisory
   state law, definitional issues, 35, 36,                 Commission (NBAC), 306, 312,
           181-237 (passim)                                313, 320-322, 326, 331, 334
   theoretical models, 63, 64                      private sector, 307, 323-324
Epidemiology, 24-25, 71, 75-84, 261-302            research, general, 6, 32-33, 140-149,
   see also Demographic factors; Incidence                 303-338, 482-483
           and prevalence; Population-based            funding, 305, 307, 321, 323, 327
           studies; Reporting practices; Risk          sampling, 144
           factors                                 socioeconomic status, 327
   definitional issues, 72, 73, 75-77, 85,      Ethnicity, see Race/ethnicity
           87, 266, 278, 280                    Evaluation of interventions, xiii, 2, 5, 6, 12,
   forensics and, 371, 373-374                             17-18, 25, 32, 121-139, 285
   screening and case identification, 107          see also Ethical issues; Outcome
   surveillance, 4, 42, 46, 59, 75, 79, 80,                measures; Reporting practices
           87                                      adult protective services, 6, 32, 122,
Established Population for Epidemiologic                   124-127, 139, 506
           Studies in the Elderly (EPESE),         child and domestic abuse, 501-525
           24-25                                   community-level factors, 122, 128
Ethical issues                                     cost factors, 121, 126
   see also Informed consent                       criminal justice system, 32, 122, 127-
   caregiver abuse and neglect, 322, 333-                  128, 129-130, 131
           334                                     emergency medical services, 124, 128,
       informed consent, 143, 147-148,                     139
           311, 314-315, 333-334                   ethical issues, 303, 305
   child abuse and neglect, 315-316, 329-              informed consent, 6, 140, 141-143
           331, 333                                financial abuse, 418-429
   confidentiality, 33, 83, 145-147, 304,          funding, 121, 131, 137-138
           308-309, 312, 323-324, 328,             guidelines for measurement, 46-47
           329-330, 334, 411                    Expertise, 169, 170
   cost factors, 313, 321, 322                     see also Interdisciplinary approaches;
   definitional issues, 306, 307, 308, 310                 Professional education; specific
   Department of Health and Human                          disciplines and specific expertise
           Services (DHHS),                        committee biographical sketches, 249-
       Federal Policy for the Protection of                259
           Human Subjects (Common Rule),           definitional issues, 45-47
           304, 305, 306, 307-309, 312,            financial abuse, criminal investigation,
           314, 319, 323, 325-326, 332,                    421
           334                                     forensics, 366, 369-370, 373, 375
       informed consent, 149, 315, 316(n.4)        guidelines for measurement, 45-47, 57-
   families, 322, 324                                      58
       informed consent, 143, 147-148,             peer review, 18, 74, 152, 321
           311, 314-315                            specialists, 130-131, 132-133, 272; see
   harm, general, 311, 319, 321-322, 324-                  also specific experts
           326, 329                             Exploitation, 1, 9, 11, 13, 14, 18, 25, 28
                                                   see also Financial abuse
INDEX                                                                                  535

                     F                          Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 268,
                                                           269, 284, 285-286
Families and households, 18, 24, 133, 137-      Federal government, 6-7, 239-240
            138, 173, 176, 177, 342, 384-          see also Funding; Legislation; specific
            385, 501-522 (passim)                          agencies and departments
   see also Adult children of elderly              funding
            persons; Child abuse and neglect;          ethical guidelines, 32-33
            Intimate partner mistreatment;             protective measures, 14, 18
            Marriage and marital status                research, 1-2, 6-7, 11-12, 21-22, 24-
   committee research recommendations, 4,                  25, 33
            7, 70                                  historical perspectives, 12-15
   Conflicts Tactics Scale (CTS), 20, 26-27,       National Bioethics Advisory
            55, 85, 166-167, 244, 271, 274-                Commission (NBAC), 306, 312,
            275, 300-302                                   313, 320-322, 326, 331, 334
   ethical issues, research, 322, 324              nursing homes, 449-450
   financial abuse, 40-41, 96, 382, 385,           reporting requirements, 125
            392, 395, 397, 398, 399, 414,          residential care facilities, 464-465
            415, 438                            Federal Policy for the Protection of Human
        preventive measures, 430-431, 437                  Subjects (Common Rule), 304,
   historical perspectives, 12, 14, 15, 240,               305, 306, 307-309, 312, 314,
            501, 502                                       319, 323, 325-326, 332, 334
   home health workers, 52, 127-128             Fiduciaries, 28, 41, 132, 385, 389, 390,
   incidence and prevalence research, 74,                  403, 419, 426(n.49), 427, 428
            76, 85, 86, 261, 262, 264-267,         preventive measures, 434-435, 436
            268-269, 270-273, 274-275, 284         state legislation, definitions, 190-191,
   informed consent, research, 143, 147-                   192, 197, 203, 206, 211, 218,
            148, 311, 314-315                              219
   intergenerational transmission of            Financial abuse, 167, 359-360, 382-445
            mistreatment, 99                       see also Banks and banking; Fiduciaries;
   nursing homes, 453-454, 462, 482                        Guardianship and power of
   reporting practices, 122, 123, 414, 453-                attorney
            454, 462, 473-474                      abuser dependency, 96, 241, 242, 270,
   residential care facilities, 467, 473-474,              293, 296, 300, 387(n.11)
            482                                    adult protective services, 390, 394,
   risk factors, 88, 91, 92, 96, 98-99, 100,               405(n.25), 417, 436, 437
            242                                    attitudes and, 391-392, 396, 399-402,
   screening and case identification, 104,                 404, 406, 407, 414, 415, 429,
            113-114, 270, 271, 273, 293,                   438
            294, 295-297                           attorneys, 52, 390, 398, 411-412, 413,
   state law, definitional issues, 35, 36,                 423, 433-434
            181-237 (passim), 244-246              caregiver abuse and neglect, 40-41, 65,
   theoretical models, 62, 63, 70, 138                     385, 388, 395, 397-400, 435-436
Fatalities, 239                                    child abuse models, 402-408
   see also Forensics                              cognitive impairments, 393, 395, 396,
   child abuse, 340                                        397, 404-406, 407, 413, 421,
   financial abuse, 392, 393                               422, 433-434, 435, 438
   incidence and prevalence data, 76, 78,          community-level factors, 430-432, 436
            80, 243                                computer technology, 392, 395, 398,
   interdisciplinary investigation, 132                    431
   long-term care settings, 447                    cost factors, legal interventions, 422,
   suicide, 78                                             429, 434-435
536                                                                             INDEX

 criminal justice system, 392, 393, 400,        socioeconomic status, 394
         411-412, 420-423                       state law, definitional issues, 35, 38,
 definitional issues, 35, 38, 40-41,                    181-237 (passim), 247
         382(n.1), 385-386, 388-389, 409,       state programs, 14
         415, 420-421                           strangers, 52, 110-113, 261, 384, 400
     guidelines for measurement, 51-53,         theoretical models, 65
         54-55                                  trust relationships, 382, 385, 387, 392,
 disabled persons, 391-392, 395, 401,                   393, 395, 401-402, 415
         406, 409, 422, 435                     undue influence and duress, 131, 192,
 emotional impacts of, 391, 392, 399, 409               195, 197, 203, 206-207, 210,
 families, 40-41, 96, 382, 385, 392, 395,               211, 212, 219, 222, 226, 231,
         397, 398, 399, 414, 415, 438                   233, 237, 304, 309, 312, 386,
     preventive measures, 430-431, 437                  387, 389, 400, 404, 405, 407,
 forensics, 340                                         425
 fraud, 131, 132, 134, 185, 207, 210,        Finland, 244
         211, 213, 216, 221, 227, 231,       Florida, 125, 189-191
         236, 340, 359, 360, 372, 385,       Food, see Nutrition
         387, 400, 404-405                   Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 140,
 gender factors, 394-395                                307-308
 incidence and prevalence, 1, 9, 11, 74,     Foreign countries, see International
         243-244, 274, 389-391, 401,                    perspectives; specific countries
         437-438                             Forensics, 65, 101-102, 119-120, 129, 132,
 inheritance, 392, 399, 403(n.22)                       339-381
 international perspectives, 390, 394           abrasions and lacerations, 54, 118, 119,
 intimate partners, 394, 401, 402-403,                  340, 344-345, 359, 360, 361,
         408-410                                        372, 454
 isolation and, 393, 395, 397, 402, 435         age factors, 341, 344-360 (passim)
 marriage and marital status, 394, 401,         biomarkers, 3, 23, 74, 84, 101-102, 340,
         402-403, 408-410                               360-362
 medical services, 397, 399, 416, 435-436       bruises, 20, 49, 54, 114, 116, 117, 119,
 mental illness, 397, 399                               120, 127, 166, 183, 186, 216,
 neglect, 387, 395, 409                                 340, 342-343, 345-347, 454
 professional education, of specialists,        burns, 119, 120, 340, 343, 353-354
         130, 131, 132, 419, 432, 436,          caregiver abuse and neglect, 342, 343-
         437                                            381 (passim)
 protective orders, 418, 425                    centers, 368-369, 375
 psychological factors, 391, 392, 399,          child abuse and neglect, 339-340, 360-
         401, 409                                       361
 race/ethnicity factors, 388, 390-391, 394      cognitive impairments, 343, 354-357,
 reporting requirements, 123, 383, 391,                 360, 366-367, 371-372
         393, 410-418                           computer applications, 362
 research recommendations, 3, 7, 436-439        decubiti, 340, 343, 348, 349-350, 360,
 risk factors, 92, 96, 393-402                          372
 screening and case identification, 110-        definitional issues, 341, 342, 343, 344,
         113, 166-167, 274, 293, 295,                   364
         300, 382, 421, 429-436, 438            dementia, 355, 356-357, 362-363, 366
 self-abuse and neglect, 397, 414               depression, 355, 357, 362-363, 366
 sociocultural factors, 388, 393, 395,          emotional abuse, , 340
         397, 417, 438                          epidemiology, 371, 373-374
     preventive measures, 430-431, 435
INDEX                                                                                   537

   fractures, 20, 79, 114, 118, 119, 120,        research, general, 1-2, 6-7, 11-12, 21-22,
           127, 166, 183, 255, 340, 342-                24-25, 33, 42, 71, 95, 140, 150,
           343, 347-348, 360, 362, 371,                 151-152, 521-522
           372, 373, 448(n.2), 454, 471,         screening and case identification, 105
           472
   interdisciplinary approaches, 366, 369-
           370, 375                                                 G
   medications, use of, 340, 343, 352-353
   mental illness, 340, 355, 357, 362-363,    Gender factors, 60, 96, 168, 176, 242-243,
                                                         294
           366, 371-372
   neglect, 342, 343, 372                        see also Intimate partner mistreatment;
       dehydration, 119, 340, 351-352,                   Marriage and marital status;
                                                         Sexual abuse
           372, 448, 463
       hygiene, 340, 350, 357-358, 360,          financial abuse, 394-395
           448, 463                              institutional settings, 100
                                                 long-term care settings, 447
       malnutrition, 340, 350-351, 448, 464
       restraints, 340, 348-349                  violent crime victims, 269
   self-abuse and neglect, 343                General Accounting Office, 413
                                              Georgia, 191-192
   sexual abuse, 340, 358-359, 372
   standards, 363-364, 370, 372               Geographic factors, 4
   violence, physical, 340, 342-343, 360-        see also Community-level factors; Urban
                                                         areas; specific states and countries
           362
Fractures, 20, 79, 114, 118, 119, 120, 127,      incidence and prevalence and, 72, 79,
           166, 183, 255, 340, 342-343,                  81-82, 86, 283, 284
                                                 rural areas, 61, 66, 67
           347-348, 360, 362, 371, 372,
           373, 448(n.2), 454, 471, 472          screening and case identification, 104,
Fraud, 131, 132, 134, 185, 207, 210, 211,                106, 107
                                                 telephone interviews, 283
           213, 216, 221, 227, 231, 236,
           340, 359, 360, 372, 385, 387,         theoretical models, 61, 62, 66, 67
           400, 404-405, 412-413, 422-423,    Geriatric syndrome, 89-90
                                              Government role, see Federal government;
           424, 438
   Medicaid, 456                                         Local government; State
Fulmer Restriction Scale, 167                            government
                                              Guardianship and power of attorney, 13,
Funding, 1-2, 11-12, 27, 42, 150
   adult protective services, 14, 126, 239,              51, 239
           240, 418-419                          financial abuse, 40-41, 184, 191, 192,
                                                         200, 210, 212, 227, 389, 398-
   block grants, 14
   ethical issues, research, 305, 307, 321,              399, 413, 418, 426-429, 433
           323, 327                                  preventive measures, 431
                                                 forensics, 341, 344
   evaluation of interventions, 121, 131,
           137-138                               informed consent for research
   forensics, 341                                        participation, 314, 315-316, 321,
                                                         328
   incidence and prevalence and, 3-4, 71,
           84-86, 244                            professional education, 130, 131
   interdisciplinary approaches, 131             reporting requirements, 123
                                                 state legislation, 137, 182, 184, 191,
   Medicaid, 128
   population-based studies, 3, 84-85                    192, 200, 210, 211, 212, 213,
   prevention, 121, 131, 418-419                         217, 222, 227, 234
                                              Guidelines for Defining Public Health
   professional education, 32, 132, 133,
           151                                           Research and Public Health Non-
   protective care, 14, 126, 239, 240, 418-              Research, 306-307
           419
538                                                                                      INDEX

                      H                           Home health workers, 52, 127-128
                                                  Hospitals, 4, 6, 128, 139, 371
Hafemeister, Thomas, 256, 382-445                   see also Emergency departments/
HALF (health, attitudes toward aging, living                response services
           arrangements, and finances), 271-        child abuse and domestic violence, 503,
           272, 298-302                                     504
Handicapped persons, see Disabled persons           definition of abuse, 56
Harm, general                                       incidence and prevalence data, 79, 268-
   see also Emotional abuse; Financial                      269, 471
           abuse; Risk factors; Violence,           screening and case identification, 105,
           physical abuse                                   503, 504
   definitional issues, 1, 3, 28, 34, 39, 40        theoretical models, 65
       guidelines for measurement, 48, 53-        Hotlines, 75, 124, 167, 168, 270
           55, 56-58                              Household settings, see Families and
   informed consent, 311                                    households; Marriage and marital
   intent to, 56-57                                         status
   research ethics, 311, 319, 321-322, 324-       Hwalek-Sengstock Elder Abuse Screening
           326, 329                                         Test (HSEAST), 110-111, 112,
Hawaii, 192-193                                             166-167, 172, 271, 273-274,
Hawes, Catherine, 133-134, 137, 256, 446-                   293, 366
           500                                    Hygiene, 136, 169, 192, 217, 218, 340,
Health Care Financing Administration                        350, 357-358, 360, 448, 463
           (HCFA), 457                              decubiti, 340, 343, 348, 349-350, 360,
   Centers for Medicare and Medicaid                        372
           Services (CMS), 152, 448, 457-
           459, 460-462, 479
   Medicaid, 128, 134, 448, 451, 457, 466,                               I
           479
   Medicare, 294, 448, 451, 456-457               Idaho, 193
Health factors, see Activities of daily living;   Illinois, 193-195, 246-247, 390
           Disabled persons; Diseases and         Improving the Quality of Long-Term Care,
           disorders; Medical interventions                    133
Heirs, see Inheritance                            Incidence and prevalence, xiii, 1, 9, 13-14,
Historical perspectives, 12-18, 72-73, 88,                     71-87, 169, 170, 172, 177, 243-
           238-240, 501                                        245, 383-384
   adult protective services, 13-15, 17, 238-          see also Reporting practices; Surveys
           240, 506                                    caregiver abuse and neglect, general, 73,
   aging of general population, xiii, 9-10,                    74, 76, 261, 270-273
           78, 152                                     child abuse, 13, 278-281, 287
   child abuse and neglect, 12-13, 14, 16-             cognitive impairments, 76, 83, 270-272,
           17, 18-19, 126, 339, 383, 501,                      273, 284, 286, 287, 451
           506                                             dementia and, 10, 246, 262, 270,
   criminal justice system, 15, 240, 506                       276, 286, 451, 452
   diseases and disorders, general, 14, 61, 69         community-level factors, xiii, 71, 80, 86,
   family factors, 12, 14, 15, 240, 501, 502                   87
   forensics, 339                                      cost of research, 80, 265, 282, 286,
   incidence and prevalence and, 72-73,                        287
           383-384                                     criminal justice system, 71, 77, 261,
   research on abuse, 11-12, 23, 24-25, 90-                    264, 267-269, 280, 284, 287
           91, 383                                     definitional issues, 20-21, 71, 75-84
   residential care facilities, 468-469                dementia and, 10, 246, 262, 270, 276,
   theoretical models, 61, 240-241                             286, 451, 452
INDEX                                                                                      539

   demographic factors, general, xiii, 73,      Indicators of Abuse Screen (IOA), 110-111,
           86, 266, 269                                     167, 270-271, 296-297
   disabled persons, 10, 11, 264, 265, 270-     Individual personal factors, 5, 89, 97, 242,
           271, 285                                         266, 284
   diseases and disorders and, 137-138,             see also Alcohol abuse; Diseases and
           150                                              disorders; Gender factors;
   economic factors, 79, 81-82, 87, 270,                    Psychological factors; Race/
           280                                              ethnicity
   emergency medical services data, 79,             theoretical models, 61, 62, 63, 67, 91
           471, 472-473                         Informed consent, 6, 140-143, 145-147,
   emotional abuse, 74, 275, 284, 451,                      309-319, 323, 328, 332-334
           454-455                                  see also Guardianship and power of
   families, general, 74, 76, 85, 86, 261,                  attorney
           262, 264-267, 268-269, 270-273,          child abuse and neglect, 143
           274-275, 284                             cognitive impairments, 6, 140, 141-143,
   forensics and, 371, 373-374                              309-311, 312, 314-317
   funding to assess, 3-4, 71, 84-86, 244               mental illness, 6, 140, 141-143
   geographic factors, 72, 79, 81-82, 86,           families, 143, 147-148, 311, 314-315
           283, 284                                 financial abuse, 405
   historical perspectives, 72-73, 383-384          guardianship, informed consent for
   hospitals, 79, 268-269, 471                              research, 314, 315-316, 321, 328
   international perspectives, 73-74, 243-          institutional review boards (IRBs), 142,
           245                                              143, 148-149, 304, 316(n.4),
   interviews, 74, 76, 83, 243-244, 261,                    317-319, 323
           264-265, 270-277, 278, 281-283,          interviews, 311, 312
           285-287                                  language issues, 312
   long-term care facilities, 133-134               standards, 6, 140, 141-143, 309-311
   mental illness and, 87, 270, 282             Inheritance, 392, 399, 403(n.22)
   neglect, 74, 81, 173, 274, 462-464           Iowa, 195-197
   protective factors and, 71, 73, 76, 79-80    Inspection of institutional facilities, 80, 84,
   questionnaires, 74, 86, 270-277, 280-                    134, 137
           281, 287                             Institutional review boards (IRBs), 6, 7, 27,
   race/ethnicity factors, 82, 269                          32-33, 140, 143-145, 148-149
   research methodology, general, 2-5, 10,          licensing, 80, 134, 316(n.4), 411
           22-23, 24, 30-31, 71-87, 243-            research ethics, 304, 308-309, 313, 319-
           245, 261-302                                     321, 323-324, 331
   sampling, 74, 86, 87, 282, 283, 284,                 informed consent, 142, 143, 148-
           286                                              149, 304, 316(n.4), 317-319, 323
   sexual abuse, 75, 78, 275, 276, 280, 284         theoretical models, 62, 64, 66-69
   sociocultural factors, 79, 81-82, 87, 270,   Institutional settings
           280                                      see also Adult protective services;
   socioeconomic status, 81-82, 262, 282-                   Assisted-living settings; Hospitals;
           283                                              Long-term care settings; Nursing
   strangers, abuse by, 74, 261, 283, 284                   homes
   theoretical models, 60, 87                       evaluation of interventions, 122, 128,
   trust relationships, general, 74, 77                     133-137
   urban areas, 73, 269, 275                        financial abuse, 385
   violence, physical, 74, 76, 79, 81, 85,          incidence and prevalence and, 73, 76,
           262, 273-276, 278, 283-285,                      77, 79, 82, 83, 384
           287, 451, 452-453, 455                   inspections, 80, 134, 137
Indiana, 195-196, 473                               medications, 36
540                                                                                    INDEX

    population-based studies, 3, 73               Intimate partner mistreatment, 17, 18, 26-
    professional education for staff, 115,                    27, 91, 96-97
            127-128, 134, 136-137, 485-487,           see also Marriage and marital status
            488, 517, 518                             community-level factors, 505, 510-516
    record linkage, 83                                definitional issues, 402(n.20)
    restraints, 36, 52                                financial abuse, 394, 401, 402-403, 408-
    risk factors, 99-100, 102                                 410
    screening and case identification, 104, 109       intergenerational transmission of
    state law, definitional issues, 35, 36, 37,               mistreatment, 99
            187-188, 194, 196, 201, 202, 209,         interventions, 501-525 (passim)
            214, 215, 217, 218, 220, 221, 222,        violent, 41, 55, 63, 65, 99, 241-242,
            223, 225-226, 233, 235                            261-262(n.1), 271, 274, 300-302,
    violent abuse, 99-100, 181-237 (passim)                   409-410, 502-503, 504-522
Instrumental activities of daily living                       (passim)
            (IADLs), 10, 11                       Isolation and confinement, 166-167, 293,
Interdisciplinary approaches, 7, 32, 130-                     294, 300
            133, 366                                  see also Restraints
    adult protective services, 126, 138               definitional issues, 35, 36, 52, 56, 448,
    community-level factors, 131-132                          450
    forensics, 366, 369-370, 375                      financial abuse, 393, 395, 397, 402, 435
    inspection of institutions, 137                   institutional settings, 100
    professional education, 130-131                   nursing homes, 448, 450, 454
International perspectives, 14, 506                   residential care facilities, 466-467
    see also specific countries                       risk factors, 91, 93, 241, 270, 293, 294,
    child abuse prevention, 13, 506                           300
    financial abuse, 390, 394                         state law, definitional issues, 35, 36,
    incidence and prevalence, 73-74, 243-245                  181-237 (passim)
International Society for Prevention of Child         theoretical models, 64, 91
            Abuse and Neglect, 13
Interventions, 4, 6, 14
    see also Evaluation of interventions;                               J
            Preventive interventions;
            Remedial interventions; Screening     Joint Commission on Accreditation and
                                                            Health Care Organizations, 128,
            and case identification
    child abuse and domestic violence, 501-                 363-364
            525 (passim)                          Journal of the American Medical
                                                            Association, 13
    committee recommendations, 4, 6
    cost factors, 18, 282, 286, 287, 510
    geriatric syndrome, 90
    intimate partner abuse, 501-525 (passim)
                                                                       K
    theoretical models, 69-70                     Kansas, 197-198
Interviews, 176                                   Kentucky, 198-199
    see also Questionnaires; Telephone
    ethical issues, 323
        informed consent, 311, 312                                     L
    incidence and prevalence, 74, 76, 83,
            243-244, 261, 264-265, 270-277,       Lacerations, see Abrasions and lacerations
            278, 281-283, 285-287                 Language issues
    long-term care staff/ residents, 481-482         informed consent, 312
    screening and case identification, 110-          nursing homes, communication deficits,
            113, 115, 120, 166-173 (passim),                452, 462
            270-276, 277, 281-283
INDEX                                                                                    541

Law enforcement, see Criminal justice               incidence and prevalence research, 133-
           system; Police                                   134
Lawyers, see Attorneys                              research recommendations, 4, 5, 7, 65,
LEAD methodology, 45-47, 59, 106-107,                       72, 78, 86-87
           115, 118                                 theoretical models, 65
Legal issues, general, 262(n.1), 328-329         LONGSCAN, 329, 330, 331, 333
   see also Criminal justice system; Ethical     Long-Term Care Ombudsman program,
           issues; Fiduciaries; Forensics;                  457
           Guardianship and power of             Long-term care settings, 4-5, 10-11, 18,
           attorney; Informed consent;                      150-151, 176, 446-500
           Legislation; Regulatory issues           see also Assisted-living settings;
   civil justice interventions, 28, 32, 130,                Institutional settings; Nursing
           131, 134, 145, 221, 251, 255,                    homes; Residential care facilities
           324, 341, 342, 343, 362, 374,            attitudes, 10, 446-447
           421, 423-429                             cognitive impairments, 446, 451, 452,
   confidentiality, 33, 83                                  465, 466, 467, 482
   financial abuse, cost factors, 422, 429,         definitional issues, 203, 448-450
           434-435                                  forensics, 371, 488
   historical perspectives, 12-13, 239, 240         incidence and prevalence, 4-5, 450-483,
   screening and case identification, 106                   487-489
Legislation, 42, 125, 240                           ombudsmen, 25, 122, 123, 125, 131,
   see also Regulatory issues; State                        134, 137, 169, 170, 366, 373,
           government                                       448, 450, 453, 456-460, 463
   Age Discrimination in Employment Act,            sexual abuse, 452
           42                                    Louisiana, 199-200
   child abuse and domestic violence, 13,
           14, 506, 507-510
   Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment                               M
           Act, 13
   Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention           MacArthur Risk Assessment, 333
                                                 Maine, 200-201
           and Control Act, 145-146
   financial abuse, 386, 418                     Malnutrition, see Nutrition
   Older Americans Act, 15, 42, 131, 240         Maltreatment, see Child abuse and neglect;
                                                           Definitional issues; Domestic
   Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act,
           450, 451                                        violence; Emotional abuse;
   Public Health Service Act, 145, 146, 323                Exploitation; Financial abuse;
                                                           Self-abuse/self-neglect; Sexual
   reporting requirements, 125
   Social Security Act, 13, 14, 239                        abuse
   Victims of Crime Act, 419-420                 Marriage and marital status, 168, 242, 296
                                                   see also Intimate partner abuse
Local government
   see also Adult protective services;             financial abuse, 394, 401, 402-403, 408-
           Community-level factors;                        410
                                                   residential care facilities, 465
           Criminal justice system
   financial abuse, 436                            theoretical models, 63
   institutional inspections, 137                Massachusetts, 202-203, 246, 405
                                                 Mass media, 15, 519
   screening and case identification, 115, 436
Longitudinal studies, 4, 72, 78, 86, 102,        McFeeley, Patricia, 256-257, 339-381
           170, 171, 194-195                     Medicaid, 128, 134, 448, 451, 457, 466,
                                                           479
   clinical studies, 5, 86-87, 243
   ethical issues, 329, 330-331, 333             Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS),
       informed consent, 313                               479
542                                                                                INDEX

Medical interventions, 79-80, 150-151           Minorities, see Race/ethnicity
  see also Clinical practices and research;     Mississippi, 207-208
          Emergency departments/response        Missouri, 208-210
          services; Forensics; Nurses and       Mistreatment, see Child abuse and neglect;
          nursing; Physicians                             Definitional issues; Domestic
  biomarkers, 3, 23, 74, 84, 101-102, 340,                violence; Emotional abuse;
          360-362                                         Exploitation; Financial abuse;
  community-level programs, 510-512                       Self-abuse/self-neglect; Sexual
  evaluation of interventions, 122, 127-                  abuse
          129                                   Models and modeling, see Definitional
  financial abuse, 397, 399, 416, 435-436                 issues; Theory and theoretical
  Medicaid, 128, 134, 448, 451, 457, 466,                 models
          479                                   Montana, 210-211
  Medicare, 294, 448, 451, 456-457              Mortality, see Fatalities
  screening during, 75, 104, 108, 127-128       Mount Sinai/Victim Services Agency Elder
  state legislation, 181-237 (passim)                     Abuse Project Questionnaire, 365
Medicare, 294, 448, 451, 456-457                Multidisciplinary approaches, see
Medications                                               Interdisciplinary approaches
  cognitive effects, 264, 406(n.29)
  definition of maltreatment, 35, 52, 56,
          81                                                        N
  financial abuse, 406(n.29)
  forensics, 340, 343, 352-353                  National Association of Adult Protective
  residential care facilities, 466, 467, 468-             Services Administrators, 126
                                                National Bioethics Advisory Commission
          469
  restraints, 52, 448, 466, 468-469                       (NBAC), 306, 312, 313, 320-322,
  screening and case identification, 108,                 326, 331, 334
                                                National Center for Injury Prevention, 80
          293, 295
Mental illness, 12, 50                          National Center on Elder Abuse (NCEA),
  see also Cognitive impairments;                         15, 22-23, 132, 265-266, 385,
                                                          389-390
          Dementia; Depression
  alcohol abuse, 21, 91, 94, 95, 242, 270,      National Commission for the Protection of
          282, 293, 294, 296, 299, 355,                   Human Subjects of Biomedical
                                                          and Behavioral Research, 315-
          357, 398
  financial abuse and, 397, 399                           316, 319-320, 327
  forensics, 340, 355, 357, 362-363, 366,       National Crime Victimization Survey
                                                          (NCVS), 268-269
          371-372
  incidence and prevalence of                   National Elder Abuse Incidence Study
          mistreatment and, 87, 270, 282                  (NEAIS), 263, 266-267, 277, 286
                                                  financial abuse, 383, 394, 401, 412,
  informed consent, 6, 140, 141-143
  reporting requirements, 122                             417, 432, 437
  residential care facilities, 465, 466, 467    National Incident Based Reporting System
                                                          (NIBRS), 268, 269
  as risk factor, general, 94-95, 242
  screening and case identification, 109,       National Institute of Justice, 7, 131, 137-
          117, 270, 282, 294, 296                         138, 150
                                                National Institute on Aging (NIA), 2, 6-7,
  substance abuse, 94, 95, 145-146, 242,
          366, 398, 399                                   11, 12, 24-25, 95, 144, 149, 150,
  theoretical models, 63, 64, 240-241                     151, 243, 483
                                                National Institutes of Health (NIH), 12
Michigan, 203-204, 473
Minimum Data Set (MDS), 479                       confidentiality, 33, 145, 146-147
Minnesota, 125, 205-207                           informed consent, 149
                                                National Long Term Care Survey, 11
INDEX                                                                                    543

National Mortality Followback Survey, 447           communication deficits of residents, 452,
National Ombudsman Reporting System                         462
          (NORS), 457                               definition of abuse, 448-449
National Survey of Adolescents, 279, 285            financial abuse, 435
National Violent Death Reporting System,            home health workers, 52, 127-128
          80                                        neglect, 449-450, 462-464, 469
National Women’s Study, 279, 280-281,               reporting practices, 460-462, 470, 472-
          285                                               473, 474-476
Nebraska, 211                                       research ethics, 313
Neglect, general, xiii, xiv, 5, 11, 12, 13, 14,     residential care facilities, 470, 472-473,
          17, 22-23, 95, 168                                485-487, 490
  see Child abuse and neglect; Isolation            staff, 134-135, 136-137, 448-449, 455,
          and confinement; Nutrition;                       456, 459, 460-464, 485-487, 490
          Restraints; Self-abuse/self-neglect           registries, 460-462, 483, 484, 485-
  abandonment, 36, 184, 188, 199, 216,                      487, 490-491
          222, 225, 236, 357                      Nursing homes, 11, 13-14, 176, 351, 447,
  community-level programs, 510                             450-464
  decubiti, 340, 343, 348, 349-350, 360,            activities of daily living (ADLs), 452,
          372                                               479
  definitional issues, 19, 20-21, 34-37             adult protective services and, 13-14,
          (passim), 39, 41, 44, 181-237                     239, 243
          (passim), 342, 449-450                    cognitive impairments, 313, 333, 351
      guidelines for measurement, 44, 56            decubiti, 345
  dehydration, 119, 166, 183, 186, 272,             definition of mistreatment, 18, 51, 52,
          340, 351-352, 372, 448, 463                       448-450
  financial, 387, 395, 409                          dementia, 451, 452, 482, 485, 486
  forensics, 342, 343, 372                          demographics, 11, 447
  hygiene, 136, 169, 192, 217, 218, 340,            emotional abuse, 448, 449, 451, 454-
          350, 357-358, 360, 448, 463                       455, 462
  incidence and prevalence, 74, 81, 173,            evaluation of interventions, 125, 133-
          274, 462-464                                      137 (passim)
  malnutrition, 340, 350-351, 448, 464              families and, 453-454, 462, 482
  nursing homes, 449-450, 462-464, 469              financial abuse, 51, 52, 384, 385, 389,
  residential care facilities, 467-468                      411, 412, 414
  restraints, 340, 348-349                          forensics, 347, 350, 351-352, 359, 364,
  screening and case identification, 110-                   367, 371, 375
          113, 118, 119, 274, 293-302               incidence and prevalence of
          (passim)                                          mistreatment, xiii, 77, 79-80, 86,
  state law, 124, 387                                       99, 176, 447, 450-464, 471, 477-
Nevada, 212-213                                             483
New Hampshire, 213                                  isolation and confinement, 448, 450,
New Jersey, 213-214                                         454
New Mexico, 214-215                                 number of elderly in, 10-11, 151, 447
New York, 216-217, 432                              nutrition, 350, 351-352
North Carolina, 217-219                             preventive measures, 7, 151, 152, 455,
North Dakota, 219                                           489-491
Nurse Aid Registry, 471                             reporting practices, 446-447, 450-464,
Nurses and nursing, 21, 22, 41, 52, 60, 61,                 471
          73, 169, 272                              research ethics, 313, 333, 482-483
  adult protective services and, 456-460            risk factors, 64, 66, 99, 100, 102, 451-
  cognitive impairments, 451, 452, 482                      453, 479, 483-491
544                                                                                   INDEX

  sampling, 478-481                                 guidelines for measurement, 45, 50
  screening and case identification, 104,           screening and case identification, 108
          109, 113, 117, 119, 357, 488              strangers, abuse by, 261
  sexual abuse, 359, 451, 452, 485                  theoretical models, 62-64
  state government, general, 200, 208,
          448, 457, 460-462
  state legislation, definitional issues, 200,                        P
          208, 448
  theoretical models, 62, 64, 66                 Pennsylvania, 21, 223-234
                                                 Pepper, Claude, 14-15, 18, 239, 240
  violent abuse, 448-450, 451, 452-454,
          455                                    Pharmaceuticals, see Medications
Nutrition                                        Physical abuse, see Restraints; Sexual abuse;
                                                            Violence, physical abuse
  dehydration, 119, 166, 183, 186, 272,
          340, 351-352, 372, 448, 463            Physicians, 13, 21, 41, 60, 109, 123, 127,
  Elder Assessment Instrument (EAI), 166-                   170, 175, 199
                                                    reporting practices, 472
          167, 272, 294, 365
  forensics, 340, 350-351, 360, 448, 464            research ethics, 313
  nursing homes, 350, 351-352                       screening and case identification, 278,
                                                            293, 365
  weight loss, 340, 350-351, 448, 464
                                                 Police, 16, 21, 60, 73, 81, 93, 104, 122,
                                                            123, 125, 127, 129, 130, 132,
                     O                                      137, 138, 269, 282
                                                    financial abuse, 422
Occurrence of mistreatment, see Incidence           forensics, 341
           and prevalence                        Political and policy issues, 1, 7, 14-15, 18,
Office for Human Research Protections, 6-                   238-240, 262(n.1), 303-338
           7, 33, 149, 151                          see also Ethical issues; Federal
Office of Behavioral and Social Science                     government; Funding; Legislation;
           Research on Women’s Health, 12                   Local government; Standards;
Office of the Assistant Secretary for                       State government
           Planning and Evaluation, 3, 479-         advocacy, 14, 15, 17, 130, 136, 239,
           480                                              251, 256, 316, 356, 388, 418,
Ohio, 219-221                                               419, 422, 423, 429, 430, 489,
Oklahoma, 221-222                                           490, 505-506, 516
Older Americans Act, 15, 42, 131, 240            Population-based studies, xiv, 2, 23-24, 73,
Ombudsmen, 25, 122, 123, 125, 131, 134,                     74, 76-77
           137, 169, 170, 366, 373, 448,            biomarkers and, 84
           450, 453, 456-460, 463, 467,             committee recommendations, 3, 30-31
           468, 470, 471, 473-474, 485,             funding, 3, 84-85
           488-489                               Power of attorney, see Guardianship and
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 450, 451                 power of attorney
Online Survey Certification and Reporting        Prevalence, see Incidence and prevalence
           System (OSCAR), 471                   Preventive interventions, 2, 12, 285, 517-519
Oregon, 223                                         see also Adult protective services;
OSCAR database, 457, 471, 476-477, 478                      Professional education; Public
Outcome measures, 3, 4, 5-6, 78-79, 86-87,                  education; Screening and case
           243, 284                                         identification
   see also Fatalities                              child abuse and domestic violence, 501-
   adult protective services, 126                           522 (passim)
   committee recommendations, 4-6                   committee recommendations, 4, 6, 139,
           (passim), 45, 137-139                            151
INDEX                                                                                   545

    financial abuse, 418-419, 429-436, 437     Protocol for Health Care Professionals, 277
        banks and banking, 132, 296, 414,      Psychological factors, 24, 97
            430, 431-433, 435, 437                see also Attitudes; Cognitive
    funding, 121, 131, 418-419                            impairments; Emotional abuse;
    historical perspectives, 12, 15                       Isolation and confinement;
    incidence and prevalence and, 71, 78, 86              Mental illness
    institutional settings, 13                    community-level programs, 510-512
    nursing homes, 7, 151, 152, 455, 489-         definitional issues, 50, 448
            491                                   effects of mistreatment, 3, 4, 35, 58, 64,
    research, ethical guidelines, 144, 306-               78, 79, 87, 279, 284, 391
            307                                   financial abuse, 391, 392, 399, 401, 409
    residential care facilities, 489-491          nursing homes, 448
    risk factors and, 88-89                       theoretical models, 63, 64, 66, 68, 69,
    theoretical models, 69-70                             240-241
Privacy, see Confidentiality                      trust relationships, 2, 3
Private sector, 7, 32, 151, 152                Public education, 267-268, 517-518
    see also Attorneys; Banks and banking         child abuse, 267-268, 505, 517-518
    financial abuse, 433                          mass media, 15, 519
    incidence and prevalence and funding,         reporting practices, 123, 267-268
            71                                    screening and case identification, 105, 107
    research ethics, 307, 323-324              Public Health Service Act, 145, 146, 323
Professional education, 32
    adult protective services, 126
    criminal justice system, 127-131                                Q
            (passim)
    financial abuse, 130, 131, 132, 419,       QUALCARE Scale, 166-167, 173, 174
            432, 436, 437                      Questionnaires
                                                 see also specific instruments and surveys
    funding, 32, 132, 133, 151
    guardianship and power of attorney,          incidence and prevalence of abuse, 74,
            130, 131                                    86, 270-277, 280-281, 287
                                                 screening and case identification, 110-
    institutional staff, 115, 127-128, 134,
            136-137, 485-487, 488, 517, 518             113, 120, 166-173 (passim), 270-
    interdisciplinary approaches, 130-131               277, 280-281, 293-302, 365,
                                                        366, 504
    reporting requirements, 123, 266-267
    screening and case identification, 115,
            127-128
    sentinels, 22-23, 55, 74, 77, 128, 172,
                                                                    R
            244, 246, 261, 262, 266-268,       Race/ethnicity, 97, 171
            277, 278, 284, 286, 287, 394          African Americans, 97, 269, 390-391, 466
    specialists, general, 130-131, 132-133        financial abuse, 388, 390-391, 394
Prospective studies, 2, 24-25, 90-91, 334         incidence and prevalence and risk
    see also Ethical issues                              factors, 82, 269
Protective factors, 101-103                       informed consent, language issues, 312
    see also Interventions                        nursing homes, 451, 452
    definitional issues, 48, 49, 50, 58           residential care facilities, 465
    disabled persons, 98                          screening and case identification, 114
    incidence and prevalence and, 71, 73,         theoretical models, 61, 62, 64
            76, 79-80                          Records and record-keeping, 21, 22, 23, 35,
Protective orders, 418, 425                              45, 46, 53, 55, 71, 74, 78
Protective services, see Adult protective         see also Reporting practices
            services                              computer applications, 108-109, 120
546                                                                                INDEX

   ethical issues, 308, 324                       victim compensation, 130, 419-420
   financial, 54                                  victim services networks, 365, 419-420
   incidence and prevalence, 83-84, 261,          victim/witness assistance, 129-130
           262, 265-266, 267, 269, 286,        Reporting practices, 76, 122-124, 126, 175,
           287                                            177, 264, 265-268, 269, 383
   linkages, 3, 5, 25, 75, 83-84, 108-109,        see also Confidentiality; Records and
           120, 267, 286                                  record-keeping; Registries
   screening and case identification, 108-        adult protective services, 27, 28, 115,
           109, 120, 261, 262, 265-266,                   122, 167, 261, 267, 383-384,
           267                                            411-412, 417, 456-460
Registries, 107, 125, 135, 482, 483, 484,         attorneys, 52, 123, 390, 411-412, 413
           485-487, 490-491                       child abuse, 13, 16, 123, 329(n.6), 330
   nursing homes, 450, 460-462                    committee recommendations, 6, 33, 139
   residential care facilities, 470, 474-476      emergency medical services, 472-473
Regulatory issues, 133                            ethical issues, 324, 328-333, 334-335
   see also Institutional review boards           evaluation of, 122-124
           (IRBs); Legislation; Standards         families, 122, 123, 414, 453-454, 462,
   assisted-living settings, 133                          473-474
   hospital accreditation, 128                    financial abuse, 123, 383, 391, 393,
   institutional facilities, 7, 66, 133-134,              410-418
           490-491                                    banks and banking, 411(n.36), 412,
       inspection of, 80, 134, 137                        421
   licensing, 80, 134, 316(n.4), 411              forensics, 374-375
   research ethics, 27, 140, 303-309, 315-        guardianship and power of attorney, 123
           319, 328                               guidelines for measurement, 55
       Belmont Report, 303-304, 305, 306,         nurses, 460-462, 470, 472-473, 474-476
           309, 311, 316-318, 319-320,            nursing homes, 446-447, 450-464, 471
           321, 327, 334                          professional accounts, 21-23
       Federal Policy for the Protection of       professional education, 123, 266-267
           Human Subjects (Common Rule),          public education, 123, 267-268
           304, 305, 306, 307-309, 312,           sentinel reports, 22-23, 55, 74, 77, 128,
           314, 319, 323, 325-326                         172, 244, 246, 261, 262, 266-
Religious institutions, 243                               268, 277, 278, 284, 286, 287,
   screening and case identification, 114                 394
   state law, definitional issues, 35, 200,       state government, general, 122-126,
           202, 204, 206, 214, 220, 228,                  144-148, 286, 328-329, 448,
           236                                            471-472, 476-477, 482-483
Remedial interventions, 2, 12                     state legislation, 13, 18, 33, 60, 122-
   see also Adult protective services;                    124, 267, 410-418
           Criminal justice system; Medical       surveillance, 4, 42, 46, 59, 75, 79, 80,
           interventions                                  87
   case management, 4-5, 105-106, 116, 277     Residential care facilities, 4, 464-469
   civil justice interventions, 28, 32, 130,      see also Assisted-living settings;
           131, 134, 145, 221, 251, 255,                  Institutional settings; Long-term
           324, 341, 342, 343, 362, 374,                  care settings; Nursing homes;
           421, 423-429                                   Respite care
   committee recommendations, 4, 6                activities of daily living (ADLs), 466,
   epidemiology, 78                                       469, 479
   financial abuse, 418-429                       cognitive impairments, 465, 466, 467,
   informal, 93, 123                                      482
   screening and case identification, 105         databases, 471, 476-477, 478
INDEX                                                                                    547

   definitional issues, 4, 465, 475                 families, 88, 91, 92, 96, 98-99, 100, 242
       state legislation, 198, 210, 237             geriatric syndrome, 89-90
   disabled persons, 465, 466                       incidence and prevalence and, 71, 72,
   evaluation of interventions, 122, 126,                   81-82, 85, 86-87, 261-302
           133-134, 137                             isolation, 91, 93, 241, 270, 293, 294,
   families and, 467, 473-474, 482                          300
   financial abuse, 384                             nursing homes, 64, 66, 99, 100, 102,
   forensics, 344, 372, 375                                 451-453, 479, 483-491
   historical perspectives, 468-469                 race/ethnicity, 82, 269
   incidence and prevalence of                      research ethics, 309-310, 311, 313, 319,
           mistreatment, 80, 86, 464-483                    320-326, 329-334
   isolation, 466-467                                   see also Informed consent
   medications, 466, 467, 468-469                   research recommendations, 3, 5, 31, 489
   mental illness, 465, 466, 467                    residential care facilities, 465-468, 479,
   neglect, 467-468                                         483-491
   number of elderly in, 10                         sociocultural, 88, 91, 241, 270
   nurses, 470, 472-473, 485-487, 490               theoretical models, 60-70, 87
   reporting practices, 470-477                  Risk of Future Abuse instrument, 170
   research ethics, 303, 313, 482-483            Rural areas, theoretical models, 61, 66, 67
   restraints, 466, 468-469
   risk factors, 465-468, 479, 483-491
   sampling, 478-481                                                  S
   screening and case identification, 114, 488
   sociocultural factors, 466-467                Sampling, 4-5, 22-23, 24-25, 27, 90, 124,
                                                            168-177 (passim)
   socioeconomic status, 466, 467, 480
   standards, 464-465                               ethical guidelines, 144
Respite care, 93, 94-95, 125, 130, 270              incidence and prevalence of abuse, 74,
                                                            86, 87, 282, 283, 284, 286
Restraints, 36, 52, 448, 455
   chemical, 52, 448, 466, 468-469                  long-term care facilities, 478-481
   forensics, 340, 348-349                       Screening and case identification, 23-24, 65,
                                                            76-77, 88, 104-120, 166-167,
   state law, legal definitions, 181-237
           (passim), 469                                    169, 242, 503-505
Retrospective studies, see Controlled               see also Forensics; Professional
                                                            education; Reporting practices;
           studies; Longitudinal studies
Rhode Island, 224-226                                       Risk factors
Risk factors, 1, 14, 88-103, 124, 170, 241-         abandonment, 112-113
                                                    activities of daily living (ADLs), 105,
           242, 262-263, 284-285
   see also Epidemiology; Forensics;                        270-271
           Incidence and prevalence;                adult protective services, 104, 105-106,
                                                            115-116, 124, 167, 261, 267,
           Screening and case identification;
           Vulnerability, general                           277, 365
   abuser dependency, 96, 241, 242, 270,            attitudinal factors, 109, 242, 264-265,
                                                            271-272, 276, 278-279, 284,
           293, 296, 300
   adult protective services, 96, 97, 98                    293, 294, 296, 299, 396
   caregivers, general, 93-95, 98-103               biomarkers, 3, 23, 74, 84, 101-102, 340,
                                                            360-362
   child abuse and domestic violence, 88,
           91, 99, 103, 242, 503-504                caregivers, 104-120, 166-167, 242, 270,
   definitional issues, 5, 20-21, 35, 72, 89                271-277, 293-302 (passim), 504-
                                                            505
       guidelines for measurement, 48, 49-
           50, 58, 81-82, 85                        child abuse and domestic violence, 116-
   dementia, 92, 93-94, 451                                 117, 119, 267, 273, 403-404,
                                                            503-505
548                                                                              INDEX

 cognitive impairments, 76, 83, 105, 109,       questionnaires, 110-113, 120, 166-173
         114, 116-117, 270-272, 273,                    (passim), 270-277, 280-281, 293-
         284, 314, 366-367, 396, 397                    302, 365, 366, 504
 committee recommendations, 3, 4, 5-6, 31       records and record-keeping, 108-109,
 community-level factors, 104, 106, 107,                120, 261, 262, 265-266, 267
         109, 114, 115                          registries, 107
 computer applications, 108-109                 religious institutions, 114
 cost factors, 104, 106, 120, 267, 282          research, informed consent, 6, 141
 criminal justice system, 104, 105-106,         residential care facilities, 108, 114-115,
         115, 116-117, 127-128                          266, 278
 dementia, 114, 116-117, 270, 276, 277,         sociocultural factors, 114, 270, 280,
         366                                            293-296 (passim)
 disabled persons, 109, 114, 117, 270-          socioeconomic status, 114
         271, 294                               standards, 106-107, 112, 113-114, 115,
 diseases and disorders, 105, 108, 109,                 116-118, 363-364, 370, 372
         117                                    state government, 115, 488
 emergency medical services, 107, 109           statistical analysis 107-108, 110-113,
 emotional abuse, 105, 109, 110-111,                    270-272, 273, 277
         117, 166-167, 275, 295, 296            time factors, 105, 106, 107, 113, 114,
 epidemiology, 107                                      115, 238, 243, 282, 296, 365, 367
 expertise, 45-47, 57-58                        trust relationships, general, 109, 113,
 families, 104, 113-114, 270, 271, 273,                 114, 118, 293
         293, 294, 295-297                      violence, physical, 110-113, 114, 117,
 financial abuse, 132, 396-399, 419, 403-               118-120, 273-276, 278, 283-284,
         404, 432, 436-437                              293, 294, 297, 403
 forensics, 363-368, 370, 372, 375          Screening Protocol for Identification of
 funding, 105                                           Abuse and Neglect of the Elderly,
 geographic factors, 104, 106, 107                      277
 historical perspectives, 73                Self-abuse/self-neglect, 1, 19
 hospitals, 105, 503, 504                       adult protective services, 126-127
 incidence and prevalence of abuse, 74-         definitional issues, 35, 36, 40, 41, 81
         77, 79-80, 270-273                         guidelines for measurement, 44
 institutional staff, screening of, 100,            state law, 35, 36
         134-135, 490, 504-505                  financial abuse and, 397, 414
 interdisciplinary approaches, 131-132          forensics, 343
 interviews, 110-113, 115, 120, 166-173     Sentinel reports, 22-23, 55, 74, 77, 128, 172,
         (passim), 270-276, 277, 281-283                244, 246, 261, 262, 266-268, 277,
 medical care specialists, 75, 104, 108,                278, 284, 286, 287, 394
         127-128                                child abuse and neglect, 267, 268
 medications, 108, 293, 295                 Sex differences, see Gender factors
 mental illness, 109, 117, 270, 282, 294,   Sexual abuse, 16-17, 127, 280, 281
         296                                    see also Intimate partner mistreatment
 neglect, 110-113, 118, 119, 274, 293-          definitional issues, 35, 49, 183-237
         302 (passim)                                   (passim), 280, 281
     state law, 124, 387                        forensics, 340, 358-359, 372
 nursing homes, 104, 109, 113, 117, 119,        incidence and prevalence, 75, 78, 275,
         357, 488                                       276, 280, 284
 physicians, 278, 293, 365                      nursing homes, 359, 451, 452, 485
 prescreening, 5, 107, 120                      state law, definitional issues, 35, 183-
 professional education, 115, 127-128                   237 (passim)
 public education, 105, 107                     stigma, 264, 278
INDEX                                                                                    549

Social Security Act, 13, 14, 239                   screening and case identification, 106-
Social Security Administration, 431                        107, 112, 113-114, 115, 116-
Sociocultural factors                                      118, 363-364, 370, 372
   see also Demographic factors; Ethical           Supplemental Security Income (SSI), 466,
           issues; Families and households;                467
           Institutional settings; Isolation    State government
           and confinement; Race/ethnicity;        see also Criminal justice system; specific
           Religious institutions                          states
   financial abuse, 388, 393, 395, 397,            adult protective services, 14, 18, 124,
           417, 438                                        167, 239
       preventive measures, 430-431, 435           child abuse legislation, 13, 123, 506,
   incidence and prevalence and, 79, 81-82,                507-508
           87, 270, 280                            confidentiality, 33, 304
   residential care facilities, 466-467            disabled persons, definitional issues, 35,
   risk factors, 88, 91, 241, 270                          36, 37, 124, 181-237 (passim)
   screening and case identification, 114,         elder abuse legislation, 14, 19, 28, 130,
           270, 280, 293-296 (passim)                      143, 144, 245
   stigma, 69, 242, 243, 264, 278-279,                 adult protective services, 27, 28, 115,
           332, 415, 429, 503                              124, 181-182, 185, 189, 411-
   theoretical models, 60, 61, 62-64, 67,                  412, 417, 418-419, 505, 506-507
           68, 91, 240                                 age factors, 27, 28, 115, 124, 181-
Socioeconomic status, 171                                  182, 185
   ethical research, 327                               cognitive impairments, 35, 36, 184,
   financial abuse, 394                                    405, 406
   incidence and prevalence research, 81-              definitional issues, 13, 28, 34-39, 44,
           82, 262, 282-283                                60, 181-237, 384, 385, 400
   Medicaid, 128, 134, 448, 451, 457, 466,             fiduciaries, 190-191, 192, 197, 203,
           479                                             206, 211, 218, 219
   residential care facilities, 466, 467, 480          financial abuse, 13, 14, 18, 28, 184-
   screening and case identification, 114                  236 (passim), 384, 386-387, 405,
   telephone interviews, 282-283                           406, 410-418, 422, 423-429,
   theoretical models, 61, 62, 63, 64, 241                 433, 439
South Carolina, 226-227                                  fraud, 185, 207, 210, 211, 213,
South Dakota, 227-228                                      216, 221, 227, 231, 236, 387
Spouses, see Intimate partner mistreatment;            forensics, 343-344
           Marriage and marital status                 guardianship and power of attorney,
Standards, 6, 27, 45, 56, 342                              137, 182, 184, 191, 192, 200,
   see also Definitional issues; Ethical                   210, 211, 212, 213, 217, 222,
           issues; Institutional review                    227, 234
           boards; Regulatory issues                   individual statutes, 181-237
   financial abuse, proof of, 423-424                  informed consent, 142-143, 145-148,
   forensics, 363-364, 370, 372                            314
   guidelines for measurement, 45-47, 56,              institutional settings, general, 35, 36,
           58-59                                           37, 187-188, 194, 196, 201, 202,
   hospital accreditation, 128                             209, 214, 215, 217, 218, 220,
   informed consent, 6, 140, 141-143, 309-                 221, 222, 223, 225-226, 233,
           311                                             235
   LEAD methodology, 45-47, 59, 106-                   medical care, 181-237 (passim)
           107, 115, 118                               neglect, 34-37, 44, 124, 181-237
   residential care facilities, 464-465                    (passim), 387
                                                       nursing homes, 200, 208, 448
550                                                                                     INDEX

        religious institutions, 35, 200, 202,        criminal justice, 268-269
            204, 206, 214, 220, 228, 236             harm measurement, 53
        reporting requirements, 13, 18, 33,          mail, 21
            60, 122-126, 144-148, 267, 286,          Medical Expenditure Panel Survey
            328-329, 410-418, 448                            (MEPS), 479
        residential care, 13, 28, 34-39, 44,         National Crime Victimization Survey
            60, 198, 210, 237                                (NCVS), 268-269
        screening and case identification,           National Elder Abuse Incidence Study
            115-116, 124                                     (NEAIS), 263, 266-267, 277, 286
        sexual abuse, 35, 183-237 (passim)               financial abuse, 383, 394, 401, 412,
        vulnerability, 39, 41-42, 43, 50, 182-               417, 432, 437
            237 (passim), 246-247                    National Long Term Care Survey, 11
    financial abuse, 137, 182, 184-236               National Mortality Followback Survey,
            (passim), 384, 386-387, 390, 405,                447
            406, 410-418, 419, 422-429               National Survey of Adolescents, 279, 285
    funding, 7, 14, 419                              National Women’s Study, 279, 280-281,
    historical perspectives, 13, 14                          285
    institutional settings, inspections, 80, 84,     nursing homes, 464
            134, 137; see also Institutional         Online Survey Certification and
            review boards (IRBs)                             Reporting System (OSCAR), 471
    nursing homes, 200, 208, 448, 457, 460-          population-based, 3, 4, 11, 24, 45, 30,
            462                                              82-83
    reporting practices, 122-126, 144-148,           of professionals, 21, 23
            286, 328-329, 448, 471-472,              screening and case identification, 115
            476-477, 482-483                         telephone, 73-74, 82, 243, 261, 280,
    residential care facilities, 469, 470, 471,              281-283, 285-286, 287, 481
            476-477                                  victims and family members, 26
    screening and case identification, 115, 488    Sweden, 74
    theoretical models, 66
Statistical analyses, 170-174
    screening and case identification, 107-                             T
            108, 110-113, 270-272, 273, 277
Strangers, abuse by, 1                             Telephone
                                                      computer applications, 281, 283, 285-
    definitional issues, 40
        guidelines for measurement, 44, 52                   286, 287
        state law, definitional issues, 35            hotlines, 75, 124, 167, 168, 270
                                                      surveys, 73-74, 82, 243, 261, 280, 281-
    financial, 52, 110-113, 261, 384, 400
    incidence and prevalence, 74, 261, 283,                  283, 285-286, 287, 481
            284                                       telemarketing fraud, 438
                                                   Temporal factors, see Time factors
Substance abuse, 94, 95, 145-146, 242,
            366, 398, 399                          Tennessee, 228
Suicide, 78                                        Texas, 228-229
                                                   Theory and theoretical models, 60-70, 87,
Sullivan, Louis, 240
Supplemental Security Income (SSI), 466,                     91, 240-241, 271, 283
            467                                       see also Definitional issues
                                                      adult protective services, 60, 65
Surgeon General, 240
Surveillance, 4, 42, 46, 59, 75, 79, 80, 87           caregiver abuse and neglect, general, 61,
Surveys, xiii, 2, 75, 79, 82-83, 84-86, 168-                 63, 64-65, 69-70
                                                      cognitive impairments, 66, 70
            177 (passim), 243-244
    see also Interviews, Questionnaires               dementia, 66
    community, 23, 81                                 disabled persons, 64, 70
                                                      diseases and disorders, 61, 66, 68, 69
INDEX                                                                                  551

   emotional abuse, 63, 64                         definitional issues, 39, 40-41, 43, 44,
   families, 62, 63, 70, 138                               61, 238, 384-385
   geographic factors, 61, 62, 66, 67                  guidelines for measurement, 44, 47-
   historical perspectives, 61, 240-241                    48, 51-53, 57
   individual personal factors, 61, 62, 63,        financial abuse, 382, 385, 387, 392,
           67, 91                                          393, 395, 401-402, 415
   institutional review boards (IRBs), 62,         incidence and prevalence of abuse, 74,
           64, 66-69                                       77
   isolation, 64, 91                               risk factors, 88, 91
   lacking, 2, 27, 521                             screening and case identification, 109,
   longitudinal research, 30, 87                           113, 114, 118, 293
   mental illness, 63, 64, 240-241                 theoretical models, 63, 66, 91
   nursing homes, 62, 64, 66
   psychological factors, 63, 64, 66, 68, 69,
           240-241                                                  U
   race/ethnicity factors, 61, 62, 64
   risk factors, 60-70, 87                      Understanding Child Abuse and Neglect,
   rural areas, 61, 66, 67                                 xiii-xiv
                                                Undue influence and duress, 131, 192, 195,
   sociocultural factors, 60, 61, 62-64, 67,
           68, 91, 240                                     197, 203, 206-207, 210, 211,
   socioeconomic status, 61, 62, 63, 64, 241               212, 219, 222, 226, 231, 233,
                                                           237, 304, 309, 312, 386, 387,
   state government, 66
   trust relationships, 63, 66, 91                         389, 400, 404, 405, 407, 425
   urban areas, 61, 67                          Uniform Crime Reports (UCR), 268, 269,
                                                           284, 285-286
Time factors, 3
   see also Longitudinal studies                United Kingdom, 244
   adult protective services, response time,    Universities and colleges, see Academic
                                                           research
           124, 129-130
   agency/researcher cooperation, 26            Urban areas, 512
   child abuse, 280, 281, 510                      incidence and prevalence, 73, 269, 275
                                                   theoretical models, 61, 67
   community-level programs, 510
   criminal justice system, 129-130             Utah, 229-230
   epidemiology, 72, 77, 78, 87, 238, 243,
           282
   financial abuse investigations, 422
                                                                     V
   financial abuse reporting, 411               Vermont, 230-231
   guidelines for measurement, 47, 54-55, 87    Veteran’s Administration, 431
   household settings, 137-138                  Victim services networks, 365, 419-420
   intensity of abuse, 5                        Victims of Crime Act, 419-420
   nursing home use, 447                        Violence, physical abuse, 78, 168, 173, 245-
   remission, 5                                           246
   residential care facilities, family visit       see also Child abuse and neglect;
           intervals, 467                                 Criminal justice system; Sexual
   risk factors, 5, 65, 69                                abuse
   screening and case identification, 105,         abrasions and lacerations, 54, 118, 119,
           106, 107, 113, 114, 115, 238,                  340, 344-345, 359, 360, 361,
           243, 282, 296, 365, 367                        372, 449, 454
Trust relationships, general, 2, 3, 58             adult protective services, 125
   see also Caregiver abuse and neglect;           alcohol abuse, 95
           Guardianship and power of               Alzheimer’s patients, 93-94
           attorney
552                                                                               INDEX

 bruises, 20, 49, 54, 114, 116, 117, 119,        measures of mistreatment, table, 20, 26-
         120, 127, 166, 183, 186, 216,                   27, 55, 85, 166-167, 262, 273-
         340, 342-343, 345-347, 454                      276, 278, 283-284, 285
 burns, 20, 54, 119, 120, 166, 183, 186,         nursing homes, 448-450, 451, 452-454,
         216, 226, 340, 343, 353-354,                    455
         371-372                                 screening and case identification, 110-
 Conflicts Tactics Scale (CTS), 20, 26-27,               113, 114, 117, 118-120, 273-
         55, 85, 166-167, 244, 271, 274-                 276, 278, 283-284, 293, 294,
         275, 300-302                                    297, 403
 definitional issues, 35, 36, 238, 244,       Virginia, 231-232
         342, 448-450                         Vulnerability, general, 100-101
     guidelines for measurement, 48-49,          adult protective services, 124
         54-55, 56, 57                           age factors, 41-42, 43
     state statutes, 35, 36, 181-237             definitional issues, 39, 41-42, 43, 50,
         (passim)                                        182-237 (passim), 246-247
 financial abuse and, 403, 404, 409-410,         financial abuse, 401
         419                                     theoretical models, 64
 forensics, 340, 342-343, 360-362
 fractures, 119, 120, 127, 166, 183, 255,
         340, 342-343, 347-348, 360,                              W
         362, 371, 372, 373, 448(n.2),
                                              Washington, D.C., see District of Columbia
         454, 471, 472
 gender of violent crime victims, 269         Washington, 232-234
 incidence and prevalence, 74, 76, 79, 81,    Weight loss, 340, 350-351, 448, 464
                                              West Virginia, 234
         85, 262, 273-276, 278, 283-285,
         287, 451, 452-453, 455               Wisconsin, 125, 234-236
 institutional settings, 99-100, 181-237      Witnesses, criminal justice system, 116-117,
                                                        127-128, 129-130, 421
         (passim)
 intergenerational transmission of            Wolf, Rosalie, 238-248, 257
         mistreatment, 99                     Wolfe, David, 127, 257, 501-525
                                              Wyoming, 236-237
 intimate partner violence, 41, 55, 63, 65,
         99, 241-242, 261-262(n.1), 271,
         274, 300-302, 409-410, 502-503,
         504-522 (passim)
