CONTINUING CARE
  RETIREMENT
  COMMUNITIES
           (CCRCs)
A Guide Book for the New Jersey
          Consumer




          State of New Jersey
       Philip D. Murphy, Governor

    Department of Community Affairs
Lt. Governor Shelia Y. Oliver, Commissioner
Additional copies of this Guide Book may be obtained at

http://www.nj.gov/dca/divisions/codes/offices/ccrc.html

                   or by writing to:

         NJ Department of Community Affairs
           Division of Codes and Standards
          Bureau of Homeowner Protection
                    CCRC Section
                    P.O. Box 805
               Trenton, NJ 08625-0805


                    CCRC Section:
                Phone: (609) 984-7574
                 Fax: (609) 292-2839
  CONTINUING CARE
    RETIREMENT
    COMMUNITIES
               (CCRCs)
A Guide Book for the New Jersey Consumer




              Division of Codes and Standards
                Edward M. Smith, Director




       Continuing Care Retirement Community Section
                  (Revised January 2018)
                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Introduction ………………………………………………………………………. 1
   Continuing Care Retirement Community (CCRC)……………………………….. 2
   The Regulation of Continuing Care Retirement Communities …………………….3
   Certificate of Authority…………………………………………………………… 4
   Continuing Care…………………………………………………………………… 5
    - Types of Plans Through Which Continuing Care is Offered ………………… 6
    - Amenities……………………………………………………………………… 7
    - “Bill of Rights for Continuing Care Retirement Community Residents in
        Independent Living Act” (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-360.1, et seq.) ………………..         7
    - Continuing Care at Home……………………………………………………. 9
    - Obtaining Information For a Specific CCRC……………………………….. 9
   Providers ………………………………………………………………………… 10
    - Management of CCRCs ……………………………………………………... 10
   Financial Considerations ………………………………………………………… 11
   Costs Related to CCRCs…………………………………………………………. 12
    - Application Fee……………………………………………………………… 12
    - Entrance Fee…………………………………………………………………. 12
    - Monthly Service Fee…………………………………………………………. 13
   Contracts………………………………………………………………………….. 13
    - Non-Binding Reservation…………………………………………………….. 13
    - Application for Admission…………………………………………………… 14
    - Residence and Care Agreement (R & C Agreement) ………………………… 14
    - Mandated Contract Contents………………………………………………… 14
    - Ending a Contract with a CCRC…………………………………………….. 15
    - Rescission …………………………………………………………………… 15
    - Cancellation …………………………………………………………………. 15
   A Final Note to the Consumer……………………………………………………. 16
   APPENDIX I - Consumer Check List…………………………………………. 17
   APPENDIX II - Contract Check List………………………………………….. 21
   APPENDIX III - Management Provider Check List……………………………. 24
   APPENDIX IV - Financial Considerations……………………………………. 26
   APPENDIX V - Glossary……………………………………………………… 27
   APPENDIX VI - Resources / Sources of Information…………………………. 31
   APPENDIX VII - Continuing Care Retirement Communities
        (CCRCs), Listing by County…………………………………………………. 36
   APPENDIX VIII - Continuing Care Retirement Communities
        (CCRCs) at Home Programs……………………………………………..……. 41
   APPENDIX IX -“Bill of Rights for Continuing Care Retirement Community
    Residents in Independent Living Act” (N.J.S.A. 52:27d-360.1, et seq.) ……….... 42
                                INTRODUCTION
    Senior citizens are an ever increasing segment of the New Jersey population. “Aging into the 21st
Century”, a publication using current statistics from the U.S. Census Bureau, estimates that there are
currently 46.7 million Americans over 65 years old. The New Jersey Division of Labor Market and
Demographic Research has estimated that by the year 2030, New Jersey’s population age 65 years or
older is expected to reach over 1.9 million.

    The common belief that senior citizens require or are living in nursing homes is inaccurate.
Whether living in their own home or the home of a family member or friend, many senior citizens
live independently in the community. With health awareness campaigns on the rise, more senior
citizens are interested in better retirement preparation and maintaining an active social life.

    While many senior citizens live independently, some want or need living arrangements which
offer additional services and the guarantee of long-term care. Some wish to enjoy retirement and no
longer wish to care for a large home. Others, living on a fixed income, want to move to maintenance-
free home at an affordable cost. Listed here are six housing options available to senior citizens of
New Jersey.

   1. Senior Citizen Rental/Subsidized Apartments

   2. Residential Hotels/Congregate Housing

   3. Residential Health Care Facilities regulated by the Bureau of Rooming and Boarding House
      Standards, within the Department of Community Affairs, or the Department of Health

   4. Board and Care Homes, Sheltered Housing Adult Care Homes, regulated by the Department
      of Community Affairs

   5. Adult Retirement Villages/Communities regulated by the Planned Real Estate Development
      Section within the Department of Community Affairs

   6. Continuing Care Retirement Communities regulated by the Continuing Care Retirement
      Community Section within the Department of Community Affairs.

   This guide book is designed to assist the New Jersey consumer who is looking at the sixth option,
Continuing Care Retirement Communities.




                                                                                                         1
              “Continuing Care Retirement
                  Community” (CCRC)
    It may help to begin with a definition of a Continuing Care Retirement Community and note the
distinctions between a CCRC and another somewhat similar arrangement, an Adult Retirement
Community.

     A Continuing Care Retirement Community (alternatively referred to as “Life Plan Community”1.)
is dedicated to the older adult, usually 55 years and older. One distinguishing characteristic of a
CCRC is the combination of living accommodations and a "continuum of care" (described on page
4), including provisions for health care. A second distinguishing characteristic is in the content of the
contract between a resident and a CCRC. A contract with a CCRC is an agreement to purchase service
and the right to live in a specific place; it is not an agreement to lease or purchase property. Finally,
and perhaps most importantly, the level of service provided by a CCRC can increase as the resident
ages and the resident's needs increase.

    The American Association of Homes for the Aging defines a CCRC as

        An organization that provides housing, services, and health care (including long-term
        care), to people of retirement age. The community must provide increasing levels of
        care that meet the needs of individual residents, beginning with independent living and
        providing a variety of health and nursing care services. It offers a contract based on
        an entry fee that guarantees shelter and access to various health care services, whether
        these are pre-funded or on a fee-for-service basis.

In return for an entrance fee and a monthly service fee, a CCRC resident can receive continuing care
for the remainder of a lifetime, if the resident desires, and if the resident meets the health and financial
requirements of the facility.




1
   Although all current New Jersey statutes and regulations governing CCRCs refer to them as Continuing Care
Retirement Communities (CCRCs), there has been an effort amongst the industry to rebrand the name of
Continuing Care Retirement Communities to “Life Plan Communities”. See http://lifeplancommunity.org/
It’s all in the name: Life. Plan. Community.
    “Even as they think about retirement—or, more likely, self-reinvention—the boomers have no intention
    of retreating. They want to get the most out of every moment, maintaining excellent health while looking
    forward to new possibilities and planning for the active lives they choose to lead. As senior living
    communities expand and evolve to accommodate these younger older adults, it’s time to reconsider the
    Continuing Care Retirement Community (CCRC). Two years ago, LeadingAge formed the NameStorm              2
    task force to determine whether and how to evolve the CCRC name and brand. After listening to
    hundreds of consumers and industry professionals, the task force selected “Life Plan Community” as
    the new category name.”
  The Department of Community Affairs issues a Certificate of Authority to CCRC facilities which
comply with the State law and regulations that govern CCRCs.

REMEMBER THAT A CERTIFICATE OF AUTHORITY FROM THE STATE SHOULD
NOT BE CONSIDERED AN ENDORSEMENT BY THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY.

   Another form of retirement community which is sometimes confused with a CCRC is an Adult
Retirement Community (ARC). Like a CCRC, an Adult Retirement Community is a planned
development which accommodates the older adult, usually age 55 and over. Unlike a CCRC however,
in an ARC, an individual can either purchase or rent the living unit, and there is no provision for
health care.

  Adult Retirement Communities are not regulated by the CCRC law or regulations. Adult
Retirement Communities, however, are regulated by the Planned Real Estate Development (PRED)
Section of the Department of Community Affairs. For more information on Adult Retirement
Communities, contact the PRED staff at (609) 984-7574, or write the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Codes and Standards, PRED Section, P. O. Box 805, Trenton, NJ
08625.



    The Regulation of Continuing Care
         Retirement Communities
   Since 1987, the State of New Jersey has regulated Continuing Care Retirement Communities
(CCRCs). New Jersey's regulation of CCRCs seeks to protect consumers by strengthening the long-
term financial stability of CCRCs, and by requiring CCRCs to disclose a wide range of important
information to the consumer before any money is spent or any contract is signed between the
consumer and the CCRC.

   The New Jersey law calling for regulation, known as the Continuing Care Retirement Community
Regulation and Financial Disclosure Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-330 et seq.), requires those who own or
run a CCRC (also known as "providers") to register their facility with the State and prepare a
Disclosure Statement describing their services, financial stability, fees and other contract terms.
Copies of the Disclosure Statement are available from a provider to anyone who is considering living
in a CCRC. Potential consumers should telephone, write, or visit a CCRC to obtain a copy of its
Disclosure Statement before signing any contract or agreement.

   By enacting this law, the State of New Jersey recognized the need to protect senior citizens and
their families from the tragic consequences that can result when a CCRC provider becomes insolvent
or unable to offer responsible care. Protecting a senior citizen in this case is especially




                                                                                                       3
important because contracting with a CCRC often leads to the expenditure of much or all of a senior
citizen's life savings.

   If a provider complies with all the provisions of the Act, the Department of Community Affairs
provides a Certificate of Authority to the CCRC.

    Under the Act, only those facilities that fulfill the CCRC criteria described within the Act will be
eligible for certification. Once certified, the CCRC will be monitored by the Department on a regular
basis.

   To see that the law is carried out, the State of New Jersey adopted regulations known as the
Continuing Care Retirement Community Regulation and Financial Disclosure Act Regulations
(N.J.A.C. 5:19-1.1 et seq.).

    The Division of Housing and Development, now known as the Division of Codes and Standards,
in the Department of Community Affairs, was chosen to administer and enforce these regulations.
Within the Division, the Continuing Care Retirement Community Section of the Bureau of
Homeowner Protection has been given responsibility for enforcement of the regulations.

   The CCRC Section Staff is available to answer any questions concerning CCRCs and this guide
book. Members of the CCRC Section Staff may be reached by calling (609) 978-7574 or writing to:
N.J. Department of Community Affairs, Division of Codes and Standards, Bureau of Homeowner
Protection, CCRC Section, P. O. Box 805, Trenton, NJ 08625-0805.



                  Certificate of Authority

       The Department of Community Affairs will issue a Certificate of Authority to CCRC facilities
that have demonstrated compliance with the regulations. This certification should not be considered
an endorsement of the CCRC facility, but instead, as an affirmative determination that all of the
following requirements of the regulations have been met:

  1. The provider can fulfill its obligations under the Continuing Care Agreement if the
     resident complies with the terms of the offer.

  2. There is reasonable assurance that all proposed improvements can be completed as
     represented by the CCRC.

  3. The provider, its officers and/or principals have not been convicted of a crime in this State,
     the United States, or a foreign country within the past 10 years, the seriousness of which, in the
     opinion of the Department, warrants the denial of certification.


                                                                                                           4
  4. The provider, its officers and/or principals have not been subject to any permanent
     injunction or final administrative order restraining a false or misleading plan involving a
     facility disposition, the seriousness of which, in the opinion of the Department, warrants
     the denial of certification.

  5. The Disclosure Statement requirements have been satisfied.


        A Certificate of Authority will be issued only to the CCRCs that have complied with all the
regulations and whose facilities fulfill the characteristics of a CCRC specified in the regulations, a
summary of which is as follows:

  1. A facility that offers living accommodations and health care through an agreement in a
     contractual form;

  2. A facility that offers a continuum of care (continuing care) to senior citizens of New Jersey
     for a period greater than one year, or for the duration of the resident's life if he/she so desires;

  3. A facility where one enters into a contractual agreement for services rather than a contract
     for the purchase or lease of real estate;

  4. A facility in which the continuum of care combines independent living accommodations
     with provisions for health care and social services, as well as the assurance of access to assisted
     and long term care;

  5. A facility that offers this care in return for an entrance fee and a monthly service fee; and

  6. A facility whose entrance fee is not less than twelve (12) times the monthly service fee.



                             Continuing Care

        The phrase "a continuum of care" (continuing care) means that the care provided by a CCRC
will progress or increase as the needs of the individual resident increase.

         Potential residents should find out which of these components are available and the specific
details related to how a particular CCRC defines, manages, and charges for these components. This
information should be available in the Disclosure Statement, the contract, and any brochures the
CCRC may publish. Potential residents may telephone, write, or visit any CCRC being investigated
to request this information. A list of CCRCs is included in this book beginning in Appendix VII on


                                                                                                            5
pages 36 - 40. The following components of continuing care are described in detail in the Disclosure
Statement and contract of a regulated CCRC.

  A. Independent Living -- A living unit chosen by the resident for his or her exclusive use in which
the resident can live and function independently.

    B. Assisted Living/Personal Care -- Should a resident require assistance and/or supervision with
one or more activities of daily living (ADLs), then, depending on the facility and the degree of care
needed, assistance to a resident may be given in a variety of settings. Possibilities include:
       1. Assistance in the resident's living unit;
       2. Transfer to a residential health care unit which is located within the community and which
has been licensed by the New Jersey Department of Health;
       3. Transfer to a designated supervised unit specifically reserved by the provider for assisted
living within the community.
       (*Note: Assisted Living facilities are licensed by the Department of Health.)

  C. Long Term Care/Nursing Home -- When a resident can no longer function independently and
requires constant supervision or care, that care will be provided in a long term care facility,
commonly known as a nursing home, which has been licensed by the New Jersey Department of
Health.



Types of Plans through which Continuing
Care is Offered
       Continuing Care Retirement Communities regulated by the Act differ from other retirement
communities in that they assure access to specified health care services, including long term care,
should the need arise. Continuing care offered by CCRCs may include all the components described
above. However, the contract of a CCRC facility must be read carefully to determine under which
conditions that care will be provided. A CCRC will offer continuing care through a variety of
contract plans which can be divided into three basic types:

  A. The All-Inclusive Plan - The fees in this plan pay for shelter, residential services and amenities,
and long term nursing care as needed at no additional cost, except for adjustments of operating costs
due to inflation. There are some slight variations among facilities, but, generally, in an All-Inclusive
plan the health care costs are paid through all of the fees paid to the facility by all of the residents,
regardless of individual resident needs.

  B. The Modified Plan - This plan also includes shelter, residential services, and amenities.
However, this plan covers only a portion of health care offered, usually for a specified time in the
long-term facility (nursing home). After the specified time, the resident who needs the care pays for



                                                                                                            6
it at an additional charge, or the resident will pay for the health care at a fee which is less than the fee
charged to non-residents.

  C. Fee-for-Service Plan - This plan usually includes shelter, residential services and amenities,
and sometimes emergency health care. It usually guarantees access to long-term care, but the resident
who receives care will pay for it as an additional cost. Monthly fees vary according to the type of
plan, size of the living unit, number of occupants, and number of services included in the contract.


Amenities
        CCRCs offer the New Jersey senior resident a community life style as well as an assurance of
access to long-term health care. Many CCRCs offer a variety of services and amenities to residents,
all available without ever needing to leave the community. Amenities and services to look for in
brochures and contracts include:

  A. Useful services and facilities, such as an activities director for apartment residents and health
care residents, auditorium, carports or garages, chapel and chaplain, craft room and craft programs,
exercise room and instructor, game room, garden plots, golf course/putting green, greenhouse, guest
accommodations, hiking or walking trails, library, resident association, swimming pool, tennis courts,
woodworking, or metal shop.

  B. Professional health services, such as dentist's office, pharmacy, physician's office, and resident
nurse's office on site.

  C. Commercial services, such as a bank, barber/beauty shop, cable television, coffee shop, postal
service, private dining room/catering, store for gifts, food, and sundries.



“Bill of Rights for Continuing Care Retirement Community
Residents in Independent Living Act”
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-360.1, et seq.)

        The “Bill of Rights for Continuing Care Retirement Community Residents in Independent
Living (CCRC),” pertains to a resident’s entry into a CCRC, occupancy, the transfer from an
independent living environment, communication between the facility and the resident, financial
issues, and termination of services. The bill also provides for penalties of between $250 and $50,000
if a CCRC violates the provisions of the bill.

       Residents in a continuing care retirement community have special rights that are guaranteed
by law, which include, but not limited to:
     The right to be treated with dignity and respect.



                                                                                                               7
      Residents have the right to be cared for in a manner that enhances quality of life, free
       from humiliation, harassment, or threats.
      The right to be free from physical, sexual, mental or verbal abuse, and financial
       exploitation.

These are just a few rights of residents in CCRCs. A more complete list appears on page 42-44 of this
Guidebook as Appendix IX. The NJ Office of the Ombudsman for the Institutionalized Elderly
(OOIE) investigates allegations of abuse and exploitation of people age 60 or over who are living in
continuing care retirement community facilities and other long-term health care facilities. Residents
may call OOIE, confidentially and toll-free, at 1-877-582-6995 to make a complaint about abuse,
neglect, or exploitation.

Government Offices Contact Information:
   NJ Office of the Ombudsman for the Institutionalized Elderly (OOIE)
      1-877-582-6995
      PO Box 852
      Trenton, NJ 08625-0852
      Email: ombudsperson@ooie.nj.gov
      OOIE investigates allegations of abuse and exploitation of people who are age 60 and older,
      living in nursing homes, other long-term healthcare facilities and continuing care retirement
      communities.
      By law, callers may remain anonymous and our case files are closed to the public. In an
      emergency, call 911.

      Adult Protective Services (APS)
       1-800-792-8820
       To report incidents or suspected incidents of abuse, neglect, and/or exploitation of a
       vulnerable adult living in the community (not a long-term care setting), please contact APS.

      NJ Dept. of Community Affairs
       For concerns about apartment maintenance or fire safety, call the Bureau of Housing
       Inspection at 609-633-6225.

      Planned Real Estate Development Program
       For information or to file a complaint regarding the disclosure requirements of CCRCs, call
       the Planned Real Estate Development Program at 609-984-7574.




                                                                                                        8
Continuing Care at Home

       "Continuing care at home" means the provision of nursing, medical or other health related
services at the members' home or another location pursuant to a care agreement effective for the life
of the member or for a period greater than one year, including mutually terminable contracts and in
consideration of the payment of an entrance fee with or without other periodic charges. The care
contract must guarantee housing with a higher level of care, if and when required by the health
condition of the member. An individual who is provided continuing care is one who is not related by
consanguinity or affinity to the person who provides the care.

        This is an alternative program for receiving continuing care in New Jersey in accordance with
the Continuing Care Retirement Community Regulation and Financial Disclosure Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-330 et seq.). Under the "at home" program, individuals (designated as members), enter into
a care contract with a certified provider to receive continuing care in their own residences.

        In addition to providing nursing, medical, and other health related services in the home of the
member, the care agreement guarantees housing in an assisted living or long term care facility for the
reception of lifelong health care services when required. The "at home" program is designed to permit
members to remain independent and age in place in the comfort and privacy of the member's own
home. It is often a more affordable means of receiving lifelong health care services.

        See Appendix VIII at Page 41 for the current list of “CCRC At Home Programs” that have
applied for and received a Certificate of Authority from the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs.


Obtaining Information for a Specific CCRC

       Each certified CCRC publishes a Disclosure Statement and a brochure describing its services
and amenities. However, consumers seriously considering a CCRC as a housing alternative should
be aware that the regulations stipulate that:

   1. Because a potential resident will be expending a substantial sum of money in the form of an
entrance fee and a monthly service fee, and entering into a legally binding contract, a potential
resident must be well informed as to the services and benefits that will be provided;

  2. This information must be presented to the potential resident in the form of a Disclosure
Statement, which includes the contract to be signed;

  3. The Disclosure Statement must be written in plain English and in language understandable to
the potential resident; and




                                                                                                          9
  4. The resident must receive the Disclosure Statement before any contract is signed.

        All the topics discussed in this Guide Book must be explained in the Disclosure Statement
specific to each certified CCRC. A potential resident, along with family members and legal and
financial advisors, should carefully review the Disclosure Statement of the CCRC being considered.
Never hesitate to call the facility to clarify any questions that may arise.



                                      Providers

       A provider, according to the Act, is a person or group of people who undertakes the
responsibility to provide continuing care in a facility. A provider of a CCRC may be an individual, a
corporation, a partnership, or some other legal entity entering into a business venture to provide
continuing care. The business venture may be designed as a profit or a non-profit organization. It
may or may not be affiliated with a religious group, a fraternal group, or some other community
organization.

       The provider makes available a choice of living units for occupancy for as long as the resident
can function independently. The resident is paying for the right to occupy a particular unit and receive
contracted services, including access to long term care, instead of purchasing or renting the unit.

Management of CCRCs

       A provider may choose to employ an administrator or an executive director to oversee the
daily operation of a CCRC. Another option of the provider is to engage a management company to
operate and manage the facility. However, the ultimate responsibility for the CCRC and its
residents rests with the provider.

       Most providers also select a Board of Directors/Trustees who will assist in setting policies,
making decisions, and developing short and long term goals for the operation of a CCRC. If a Board
of Directors exists, a list of their names and business addresses will be found in the Disclosure
Statement. Some facilities also list them in their advertising brochure.

        As a joint effort, the provider and the Board of Directors should develop a mission statement
or philosophy that expresses why the community exists, whom it will serve, and how it will operate.
It is the mission statement or philosophy that guides the development of policies, goals, and the
decision-making process.

         One of the most important features of a CCRC is how well it is run. The administration and
operation of a CCRC affects not only the quality of care offered, but also its long term financial
stability.


                                                                                                           10
        Who manages a CCRC must be clearly defined in the Disclosure Statement and may also be
included in any advertising information distributed by the CCRC being investigated. The potential
resident should examine the information and, if possible, visit the facility, meet the administrator or
his or her representative, and speak to several residents.




                 Financial Considerations

       Continuing Care in a community setting requires a major financial investment by both the
resident and the provider. For the resident or potential resident, contracting with a CCRC can involve
spending most or all of a life time of savings. For the provider, the delivery of promised services
over the length of residents' contracts requires sound financial and actuarial management.

        To help explore the financial questions potential residents should ask before contracting with
a CCRC, this section discusses information about the finances of the CCRC, this section discusses
information about the finances of the CCRCs itself that the management must present before a
contract can be signed. This section also discusses information about the types of expenses residents
are likely to have when applying to or contracting with a CCRC.

        New Jersey requires CCRCs to disclose important information to consumers before any
contract is signed. To make sure important information about the financial condition of a provider is
available to the consumer, New Jersey's regulations mandate that each CCRC prepare and make
available to consumers a Disclosure Statement. This Disclosure Statement includes the provider's
certified financial statement, which contains the income and expense statements and the balance
sheets of the facility. In addition, the Disclosure Statement must provide information regarding the
financial security provisions undertaken by the provider to continue operations. Such provisions
should include escrow accounts, reserve funds, the manner in which funds will be invested, and who
will make the decisions for investing this money.

        In the case of a new or planned CCRC that is not yet operating, statements reflecting
projections of this financial information must be available in the Disclosure Statement.

       All of this information will assist a potential resident in judging the financial stability of a
CCRC. It is advisable that potential residents, along with legal and financial advisers, carefully
review and fully understand this information before signing any contract.




                                                                                                          11
                  Costs Related to CCRCs

         There are three fees involved in contracting with a CCRC, namely, the application fee,
entrance fee, and monthly service fee. Please note that there is a relationship between the size of the
entrance fee and whether or not a facility is regulated under the CCRC Act. Only those CCRCs
charging an entrance fee 12 times greater than the monthly service fee are regulated by this Act.
Facilities charging a lesser entrance fee are not regulated by the CCRC Act. Facilities charging a
lesser entrance fee are not regulated by the CCRC Act. The consumer should investigate whether or
not the facility is regulated and which department of State government has jurisdiction over the
facility.

Application Fee

       An application fee, sometimes referred to as a processing fee, is the first cost incurred when
considering CCRC housing. This fee is paid when applying for admission to a CCRC that has
obtained a Certificate of Authority.

        The provider may charge an application fee, separate from the entrance fee and monthly
service fee, to cover the cost of processing an individual's application to enter a CCRC facility.

       The regulations stipulate that the application fee may not be greater than $500 unless the
provider can demonstrate that the actual cost exceeds $500.

      Application fees are not always refundable. The potential resident should be informed
whether or not the application fee is refundable before submitting an application.

Entrance Fee

        An entrance fee is defined by the Act as a one-time lump sum of money paid to a provider for
the occupancy of an independent living unit chosen by the resident and for the provision of health
care. Entrance fees vary from facility to facility based on the type of living unit chosen, the number
of occupants, the services offered, and the provisions for the refund of fees. Entrance fees to CCRCs
with a permanent refund policy are generally higher than the entrance fee of a facility offering a
declining refund policy.

        The provider must specify clearly in the contract and the Disclosure Statement the amenities
and services that will be provided in return for the entrance fee, as well as conditions for the refund
of the entrance fee.




                                                                                                          12
Monthly Service Fee

        The monthly service fee is a charge that residents pay the provider in return for the services
identified in the contract. This monthly service fee varies from facility to facility. Factors which
influence the monthly service fee are the size of the unit, the number of occupants, the type of plan
offered, and the types and number of services included in the basic monthly fee. The Disclosure
Statement and the contract must describe in detail which services are included with the monthly
service fee and which services are available for additional fees.

        Because the monthly service fee is subject to inflation, increases in the monthly service fee
should be expected. The Disclosure Statement must provide an explanation of the method by which
fees will be adjusted. When dealing with a CCRC that has been operating for some time, a request
may be made to see the percent of increase which has occurred over the past five years. If the CCRC
is not yet operating or has been operating only a short time, and the provider or parent organization
runs other CCRCs, potential residents may examine the percentage of change in monthly fees that
has occurred in those facilities. The regulations mandate that once residency has been established, the
provider must give the resident a 30 day advance written notice before changing the monthly fee or
services.

        To help the potential resident study and compare CCRCs, this Guide Book includes a
Consumer Check List (See Appendix I at Page 17), a Contract Check List (See Appendix II at Page
21), and a Management/Provider Check List (See Appendix III at Page 24). Use the check lists to
identify which services are and are not included in fees at one or more CCRCs. Then, use the checklist
to compare costs and services of the CCRCs being investigated.


                                     Contracts

A contract is a promise or set of promises, the performance of which the law recognizes as a duty,
and for breach of which the law gives a remedy.

A potential resident can expect to complete three types of documents when dealing with a CCRC: (1)
a Non-Binding Reservation, (2) an Application for Admission to CCRC, and (3) a Residence and
Care Agreement.

Non-Binding Reservation (NBR)

This document is used by providers who are in the development stage or who are adding additional
units to an existing facility. The NBR allows a potential resident to reserve a living unit in a specific
CCRC, for a period of time, in return for a monetary deposit not to exceed 10% of the expected



                                                                                                            13
entrance fee. This deposit, with or without interest depending on the agreement, is totally refundable
at any time at the request of the potential resident. The Non-Binding Reservation is effective for one
year or until a Certificate of Authority is issued by the Department of Community Affairs. An
application/processing fee may not be assessed when entering into a non-binding agreement.

The potential resident who has signed an NBR will be notified by the provider when the CCRC facility
has been issued a Certificate of Authority. At that point, the potential resident will be asked to enter
into a binding contract -- the Resident and Care Agreement -- within a specific period of time. When
signed by both parties -- the provider and the potential resident -- this document becomes legally
binding. At this time a provider may charge an application fee, and a Disclosure Statement must be
provided if it has not yet been received by the potential resident. If the potential resident decides not
to execute the Residence and Care Agreement, the provider will cancel the NBR and refund the entire
deposit.

Application For Admission

The Application form is a personal profile of the potential resident's finances and health. The provider
determines eligibility for admission from the information provided. Costs incurred by the provider
to process this information constitute the application fee.

An application or processing fee may be charged when applying to a certified CCRC before entering
into an agreement. The application fee cannot exceed $500 unless the provider can demonstrate that
his cost for processing the application exceeds $500.

Residence and Care Agreement (R&C Agreement)

 The Residence and Care Agreement (R&C Agreement) is the contract between the resident and the
provider, and must contain all of the terms regarding housing and care to which both parties agree.
Only facilities that have obtained a Certificate of Authority may offer a
Residence and Care Agreement. An R&C Agreement, once signed by the potential resident and the
provider, is a legally binding document.

Before the potential resident signs a Residence and Care Agreement or contract, the CCRC must
provide a certified Disclosure Statement including a copy of the agreement.



Mandated Contract Contents

The regulations mandate specific contents which must be found in a CCRC binding contract (R&C
Agreement) to protect both the consumer and the provider.

To highlight a few, the regulations stipulate that a contract shall:


                                                                                                            14
      Be written in plain English and in language understandable by a lay person; be reasonable
       and not impose undue restrictions or hardships upon the resident;

      Specify clearly what benefits and services the resident will receive in return for the entrance
       fee and monthly service fee, and which services will be provided for additional fees;

      Specify the length of time for which the contract will be in effect;

      Define the conditions which will enable the resident to continue as a member of the
       community and/or cancel the contract;

      Define conditions for the refund of deposits, entrance fees, and application fees.

A potential resident should expect to find a lengthy contract clearly defining not only the few points
highlighted above, but all of the conditions required to ensure the resident’s expenditure for lifetime
living accommodations and health care. Remember that many CCRCs offer more than one type of
contract with different benefit plans offered in return for different entrance fees and monthly service
fees. For this reason, it is essential to review any contract with a lawyer, financial planner or both
before signing the contract. These professionals should be able to explain all components of a
contract, clarify questions, and advise potential residents.

Ending A Contract With A CCRC

It is also important to note that it is possible, under some circumstances, to end a contract with a
CCRC. One way to do this is a rescission of the contract. Another way is through cancellation of the
contract. Both options are described here.

Rescission

Once the legally binding Residence and Care Agreement has been signed, the resident has an
additional 30 days to examine the contract with family and legal and financial planners. Potential
residents have the right to cancel a contract without penalty within 30 days after signing the contract.
This means that the provider must refund any money paid toward the entrance fee with or without
interest. However, the provider has the right to retain the application fee.

Cancellation

After the 30 day rescission period, the contract may be cancelled at any time before or after occupancy
of a unit within the CCRC. The provisions for cancellation must be clearly defined in the signed R&C
Agreement. The Act stipulates that after residency has been established, either party -- the resident or
the provider -- may cancel the contract upon giving at least 60 days notice. The provisions for refund


                                                                                                           15
of entrance fees upon cancellation are specific to each provider. For this reason, potential residents
should review the contract with a lawyer, a financial planner, or both before signing any contract.

In summary, when thinking about contracts it is important to note that an NBR is not binding on the
consumer, and it may be cancelled at any time with or without cause. The NBR does bind the provider
unless the provider withdraws or discontinues the project. However, a Residence and Care Agreement
is a binding contract, and if the resident does not cancel within the 30 day rescission period, the
provider has the right to impose a penalty, which should be clearly defined in the contract.



           A Final Note to the Consumer
       This Guide Book has provided a general overview of Continuing Care Retirement
Communities. Anyone considering a CCRC as a housing choice please review information from this
book, as well as all questions about life in a Continuing Care Retirement Community, with a financial
adviser and a legal adviser before signing any contract.

       Finally, for potential residents who make the decision to contract with a CCRC, it is advisable
to consider these additional matters:

       1. Consult with an attorney relative to the creation and execution of a Last Will and
          Testament.
       2. Consult with an attorney relative to the creation and execution of a Power of Attorney,
          wherein the potential resident appoints a person of choice to act as an attorney-in-fact to
          make legal decisions on the resident’s behalf should he or she be unable to do so.
       3. Consult with an attorney relative to the creation and execution of an Advance Directive
          for Healthcare, wherein the potential resident appoints a person of choice to act as the
          Healthcare Representative to make medical care decisions on the resident’s behalf should
          he or she be unable to do so.
       4. Consult with an attorney relative to the creation and execution of a Living Will, wherein
          the resident indicates his or her wishes and/or appoints a person to make any decision
          regarding the continuance or removal of life sustaining treatment.

        We hope this Guide Book is used not just as a source of information, but as a source of
potential questions to ask before contracting with a Continuing Care Retirement Community. Use
this book to work with family, friends, and financial and legal advisers to make an informed decision
when considering housing in a Continuing Care Retirement Community.




                                                                                                         16
                                      APPENDIX I

                         CONSUMER CHECKLIST
         Listed below are a variety of services and amenities which may be offered by CCRCs. If
 you cannot identify an item in the material supplied to you by the facility, ask the CCRC
 representative about it. When comparing costs of CCRCs’ entrance fees and monthly service
 fees, check off which services are included in the basic fees, which services are available for
 additional fees and which services are not available. The variation of the services offered should
 be reflected in the variety of fees charged.

 KEY:           A = Included in basic fee
                B = Available for additional fee
                C = Not Available

 Accommodations
 -Living Unit (description and cost)
 ________________________________________________________________________________

Utilities A B C Comments                                A        B      C              Comments
- Heat
- Air Conditioning
- Electricity
- Water/Sewer charge
- Real estate tax

Telephone
- Service
- Outlet only

T.V.
- T.V. Antenna
- Cable Outlet
- Cable Service

Meals
- Number of meals included in M.S.F.
- Additional meals
- Dining room (buffet/waiter service)
- Tray service when approved by M.D.
- Prescribed diets
- Guest meals


                                                                                                      17
Housekeeping
- Light housekeeping
How often?
- Heavy housekeeping
How often?
- What duties do they include?

Laundry A B C Comments
- Bed linen (S)Supplied/(L)Laundered
How often
- Laundry facilities
- Other laundry service

Maintenance and Repairs
- Electrical
- Plumbing
- Custodial
- Exterior of Living Unit
- Lawn and Snow Removal
- Trash Removal

Security
- Emergency alert system in living unit
- 24 Hour Response
Who Responds?
- Fire and smoke alarms
- Sprinkler system
- Security at entrance
- Security on duty 24 hours

Transportation
- To local areas, shopping centers
- Emergency ambulance service
- To physician’s office visits
- Vehicle equipped for handicapped
individual

Social Activities
- Activities Director


                                          18
- Social
- Cultural
- Educational
- Spiritual
- Recreational

Parking
- (A)Assigned/(NA)Not Assigned
- Garage available
- Guest Parking
- Carports

Health Related Services
- Medical Director
- Physician care
- Consulting physician
- Physician office on site
- Annual or routine physical exam
- X-ray and laboratory facilities
- Personal Care Unit

Health Related Services –cont’d. A B C
- Residential Health Care Unit
- Long term care unit
- Assistance with bathing
- Prescription medicines
- Psychiatric therapy/consultations
- Physical therapy
- Occupational therapy
- Social services
- Speech therapy
- 24 hour nursing services
- Nursing visits to living unit
- Physician visits to living unit

Amenities Yes No
- Alzheimer’s or related diseases unit
- Auditorium
- Bank
- Barber/Beauty shop


                                         19
- Chapel/Chaplain
- Coffee shop/Snack bar
- Craft rooms and programs
- Dentist office on site
- Elevators
- Exercise room and program
- Game room
- Garden plots
- Golf course/putting green
- Greenhouse
- Guest accommodations
- Hiking and Walking Trails
- Library
- Lounges
- Pharmacy
- Postal service (stamps/packages, etc.)
- Private dining room/catering
- Resident council
- Storage space (outside of unit)
- Store for gifts, food, sundries
- Swimming pool (indoor or outdoor)
- Tennis courts
- Washer/dryer in units
- Woodworking or metal shops

Other
- Burial arrangements
- Are there any other costs not listed?
- Are there any other services not listed?
- Other Services Not Listed
- Refund Policies
- Smoking Allowed?




                                             20
                                     APPENDIX II


                         CONTRACT CHECK LIST

   Below is a list of questions, answers to which should be found in the Disclosure Statement and
Contract. If the answers cannot be found by you, or are not clear, ask the CCRC Representative to
clarify those points for you.

      Has the CCRC received a Certificate of Authority from the Department of Community
       Affairs?

      Has the CCRC received Certification to solicit Non-Binding Reservations?

      What type of document is being presented for your signature?
       - Non-Binding Reservation?
       - Residence and Care Agreement?
       - Application for Admission?

      What is the effective length of time of the contract?

      What financial assets must you demonstrate in order to qualify for entry into this CCRC?

      What type insurance policies, if any, are required as an admission prerequisite?

      What physical conditions will qualify or disqualify a person for residency at this CCRC?


      Will an additional fee be charged if a potential resident has a pre-existing medical
       condition?
       - If so, how is the fee determined?
       - Who makes the determination?

      What is the minimum age required for admission? Are any exceptions made?

      What percentage of the entrance fee is required as a deposit when signing a:
       Non-Binding Reservation?
       A Residence and Care Agreement?

      When is the balance due?

      Under what conditions may you cancel your contract? How may you do this?

      If you cancel your reservation or contract, will your money be refunded with or without
       interest?


                                                                                                    21
   Are the conditions for the cancellation and refund of deposits, entrance fees, and
    application/processing fee clearly defined?
           - For the rescission period, 30 days immediately after signing the contract?
           - After 30 days but prior to taking occupancy of your unit?
           - For each contracted individual?
           - When a resident terminates or leaves the facility?
           - When a resident is permanently placed in the long term facility?
           - When the death of a resident occurs in the living unit?
           - In the long term care unit?
           - Is the payment of the refund conditioned by the resale of your vacated living unit?

   Does your contract describe conditions of residency and adjustments in the entrance
    fee/monthly service fee when:
          - resident marries another resident?
          - resident marries a non-resident?
          - a spouse dies?

   What is the total cost of the entrance fee?
           - The monthly service fee?
           - The Application fee?
           - Are the costs for single and double occupancy clear?

   What amenities are included in the entrance fee?

   What services are included in the monthly service fee?
          - Are there additional fees?
          - What is the length of time services are provided?
          - How will you be notified of a change in Service?

   When a resident can no longer live independently is the resident and/or the family included
    in the decision to transfer out of the living unit?

   If the resident is incapacitated and cannot participate in the making of decisions is the family
    consulted before or after the transfer is made?


   How long will a living unit be held when a resident is transferred to:
          - The Assisted-living area?
          - The Long-term care facility?


   If there are two residents in one living unit, what happens to the remaining resident when:
            - one is transferred permanently to the long term care facility?
            - one resident expires?




                                                                                                       22
   Under what conditions will the independent living unit be reassigned by the provider?

   How may a resident continue to live in a CCRC if he/she develops financial difficulties and
    is unable to pay the monthly service fee?

   Under what circumstances may a provider remove the resident or terminate the contract?

   Under those circumstances, will the resident be due a refund?

   Does the resident have the right to contest this decision? How?


   Will the monthly service fee change when a resident is permanently assigned to:
           - the Long-term facility?
           - the Assisted-care facility?


   May the resident have overnight guests in the:
          - Living Unit?
          - How long are guests permitted to stay in the living unit?
          - If not, are there other accommodations for overnight guests?
          - What costs are involved, if any, for overnight guests?




                                                                                                  23
                                     APPENDIX III


          MANAGEMENT PROVIDER CHECK LIST
The Act and the Regulations mandate that the management provide the potential resident with full
disclosure of the financial obligations of the facility and the provisions that have been undertaken
by the provider to assure continued operation of the facility.

Below is a list of questions regarding the management and the operation of a CCRC. Answers to
these questions should give you information to assess the financial stability of a CCRC.


PROVIDER

      Who is the owner/Provider of the CCRC?

      Is the Provider a non-profit or a for-profit corporation?

      Is the Provider affiliated with any other group?
           - To what financial obligations are the Provider committed?

      Who determines policies?

      Who makes the management decisions that govern the CCRC?

      Do residents share or have an input in the management decisions?
          - If so, how?
          - Does the CCRC have a residents council formed and functioning?

      Who develops short- and long-range plans for the CCRC?
         - The Provider alone?
         - A Board of Directors/Trustees?

      If a Board of Trustees exists, who are the members?

      Is a list of the Board Members' business affiliations, addresses, and experiences made
       available to you?



MANAGEMENT/OPERATION OF CCRC

      Is the CCRC administrator or his/her representative available to meet with you?



                                                                                                       24
   Is the administrator employed by the Provider or has the provider contracted with a
    management company to operate the facility?

   What kind of experience has the administrator/management company had in the operation of
    a CCRC?

   Does the CCRC have a handbook on "Rules and Regulations" for residents available for you
    to review?

   Is the residential health care facility and/or the long-term facility licensed by the New Jersey
    Department of Health?

   Are the latest inspection reports available for you to review, if you so wish?

   May you visit with the residents and ask them questions about the CCRC?

   Does the CCRC have written policies on admission requirements that you may review?

   What has the occupancy rate been over the last 1 - 5 years?




                                                                                                       25
                                     APPENDIX IV


                  FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS
      Is the most recent audited financial report of the CCRC available for you to review with
       your financial adviser?

      Is a yearly financial report made available to residents?

      Has a liquid reserve account been established?
          - Where?

      Under what circumstances may the reserve money be released for use?

      Is your entrance fee deposit being held in an escrow account?
           - Where?
           - When and how can it be released to the provider?

      At what rate has the monthly service fee been increased over the last 1 - 5 years?



    It is important for you to know the answers to the above questions in order to evaluate the long-
term viability of the CCRC based on the business experiences of the Provider and members of the
Board of Trustees.

  Before making a decision, go over all material with a qualified consultant to be assured that the
CCRC demonstrates the financial resources and competence to meet your needs.




                                                                                                        26
                                      APPENDIX V


                                        GLOSSARY
DEFINITIONS: The following words and terms, extracted from the "Act", shall have the
following meanings when used in the contents of this guide book.

  "Act" means the Continuing Care Retirement Community Regulation and Financial Disclosure
Act (P.L. 1986, Chapter 103, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-330 et seq.), together with any amendatory or
supplementary acts.

   "Application fee" means the fee an individual is charged, in addition to an entrance fee or any
other fee, to cover the provider's reasonable cost for processing the individual's application to become
a resident at the facility. Application fees shall not exceed $500 unless the provider can demonstrate
that the actual cost of processing exceeds $500.

   "Continuing care" means the provision of lodging and nursing, medical or other health related
services at the same or another location to an individual pursuant to an agreement effective for the
life of the individual or for a period greater than one year, including mutually terminable contracts,
and in consideration of the payment of an entrance fee with or without other periodic charges. An
individual who is provided continuing care is one who is not related by consanguinity or affinity to
the person who provides the care.

   “Continuing care at home” means the provision of nursing, medical or other health related
services at the members' home or another location pursuant to a care agreement effective for the life
of the member or for a period greater than one year, including mutually terminable contracts and in
consideration of the payment of an entrance fee with or without other periodic charges. The care
contract must guarantee housing with a higher level of care, if and when required by the health
condition of the member. An individual who is provided continuing care is one who is not related by
consanguinity or affinity to the person who provides the care.

  "Department" means the Department of Community Affairs.

   "Entrance fee" means a transfer to a provider of a sum of money or other property made or
promised to be made as full or partial consideration for acceptance of a specified person as a resident
in a facility, and includes a fee that is refundable upon the death, departure or option of the resident.

   1. A fee which is less than the sum of the regular periodic charges for one year of residency is not
considered an entrance fee for the purpose of the Act. A transfer of a sum of money or other property,
by or on behalf of a resident, to a trust account that is managed by the facility or an independent
trustee for the benefit of the resident is not considered an entrance fee for the purposes of the Act if
the transfer is not a condition of admission or of continued stay and the principal amount and any
interest thereon are the exclusive and sole property of the resident or the individual acting on behalf
of the resident.




                                                                                                            27
  "Facility" means the place or places in which a person undertakes to provide continuing care to
an individual.

     "Living unit" means a room, apartment, cottage or other area within a facility set aside for the
exclusive use or control of one person or of persons constituting a household unit.

     "Member" means a person entitled to receive continuing care at home.

     "Operator or administrator" means a person who operates or manages a facility for the
provider.

     "Provider" means a person who undertakes to provide continuing care in a facility or in the
private residence of a member.

     "Resident" means a person entitled to receive continuing care in a facility.

     "State" means the State of New Jersey.

The following definitions are usually accepted definitions when referring to statements describing
continuing care as used in this Guide Book.

    “Activities of Daily Living” (ADLs) - are those activities normally performed by individuals
which include bathing, dressing, eating, walking, toileting, and getting in and out of bed or chairs.

     “Assisted Care Units/Personal Care Units” - are sheltered/specified units where assistance
with activities of daily living is provided by support staff.

     “Available at a charge” - means services for which residents pay an additional fee. This may
also be referred to as a fee-for-service.

     “Included in fees” - means services that are covered by the basic monthly service fee without
an additional charge.

      “Per diem rate” - is a daily cost charge which is paid by the patients admitted directly to the
nursing care facility, who do not hold CCRC contracts; or by CCRC residents who must pay full price
for the nursing care they require. This is usually the case in the fee-for-service plan.

     “Permanent transfer” - implies that the resident has been moved to a higher level of health
care and his/her living unit will be released for resale.

     “Temporary transfer” - implies that although the resident has been moved to a higher level of
health care, his/her living unit has not been released for resale.




                                                                                                        28
ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS: Commonly Used Terms.

        Area Agency on Aging (AAA) - A local (city or county) agency that plans and coordinates
various social and health service programs funded under the federal Older Americans Act (OAA) for
persons 50 years of age and more. The network of AAA offices consists of more than 600 approved
agencies. Call your city or county government for the name, address, and telephone number of the
Area Agency on Aging office in your locality. For more information see
http://www.state.nj.us/humanservices/doas/home/saaaa.html
                                             34

       Boarding Home (Rooming House) - Residential accommodation that usually consists of a
bedroom/sitting room, private or shared bathroom, and common dining area. This housing is open to
persons of all ages.

       Chronic Illness - An illness marked by long duration or frequent recurrence such as arthritis,
diabetes, heart disease, asthma, and hypertension.

       Congregate Housing (Sheltered or Enriched Housing) - Specially planned, designed and
managed multi-unit rental housing, typically with self-contained apartments. Supportive services
such as meals, housekeeping, transportation, social and recreational activities are usually provided.

        Co-payment - The fixed dollar amount that you must pay for specific services under your
health insurance plan, while the insurer pays the remaining costs. The copayment amount is set
periodically and usually does not vary with the cost of the service.

       Deductible - The total initial amount that you must pay for services covered under your
insurance plan before benefits are paid by the insurer.

        ECHO Housing (Elder Cottage, Granny Flat) - A self-contained, free-standing, removable
living unit occupied by a relative on the same property and adjacent to a single-family home.

        Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) - An organization that provides a wide range of
health care services for a fixed payment made in advance.

        Medicaid - A federal/state cooperatively funded and state-operated program of health benefits
to qualifying low-income persons, established under Title XIX of the Social Security Act. States
determine program benefits, eligibility requirements, rates of payment for agencies and institutions
that provide services, and methods of administering the program under broad federal guidelines.

       Medicare - A federal health insurance program for persons age 65 and over who are eligible
for Social Security or Railroad Retirement benefits and for some people under 65 who are disabled.
Medicare was established under Title XVIII of the Social Security Act. There are two parts: hospital
insurance (Part A) which is automatic, and supplementary medical insurance (Part B), covering
physician and other services, which is voluntary and requires the payment of a monthly premium.

       Medigap Insurance - Private health insurance purchased to cover the gaps, and often some
additional services, not covered under Medicare.




                                                                                                        29
        Older Americans Act - Federal legislation enacted in 1965 and since amended to set up a
network of state and area agencies on aging to plan, coordinate, and fund local programs of services
for persons age 60 or older.

       Out-of-Pocket-Payments - Costs paid directly by an individual that are exclusive of
insurance benefits.

        Reverse Mortgage - One of the new financial plans designed to enable older homeowners to
get cash for the equity in their homes while they continue to occupy them. Money is received in
monthly payments or in lump-sum loans. A reverse mortgage or home equity conversion mortgage
(HECM) is a type of home loan for older homeowners (62 years or older) that requires no monthly
mortgage payments. Borrowers are still responsible for property taxes and homeowner’s insurance.
Reverse mortgages allow owners to access the equity they have built up in their homes and defer
payment of the loan until: 1. They decide to sell the home; 2. The owner(s) of the home pass away;
or 3. The owner fails to occupy the home for 12 consecutive months. Because there are no required
mortgage payments on a reverse mortgage, the interest is added to the loan balance each month. The
rising loan balance can eventually grow to exceed the value of the home, particularly in times of
declining home values or if the borrower continues to live in the home for many years. However, the
borrower (or the borrower’s estate) is generally not required to repay any additional loan balance in
excess of the value of the home. Any deficiency in the loan balance and proceeds from the sale of
the home is typically covered by the FDIC insurance which is required to be obtained at the inception
of the loan.




                                                                                                        30
                               APPENDIX VI


       Resources / Sources of Information

   Leading Age

    2519 Connecticut Avenue, NW
    Washington, D.C. 20008-1520
    Email: info@LeadingAge.org
    Twitter: @LeadingAge
    Phone: 202-783-2242
    Fax: 202-783-2255

    Website: http://www.leadingage.org/


   American Association of Retired Persons (AARP)

    AARP
    601 E Street, NW
    Washington DC 20049
    Phone: Toll-Free Nationwide: 1-888-OUR-AARP (1-888-687-2277)
           Toll-Free TTY: 1-877-434-7598
           Toll-Free Spanish: 1-877-342-2277
           International Calls: +1-202-434-3525
    Hours: Monday to Friday: 7 a.m. through 11 p.m. ET
    Email: member@aarp.org
    Website: http://www.aarp.org/


   American Health Care Association (AHCA)

    AHCA
    1201 L Street, N.W.
    Washington, DC 20005
    Phone: (202) 842-4444
    Fax: (202) 842-3860
    Email: help@ltctrendtracker.com
    Website: https://www.ahcancal.org/Pages/Default.aspx




                                                                   31
     National Association of States United for Aging and Disabilities (NASUAD)

      NASUAD
      1201 15th St. NW
      Ste. 350
      Washington, DC 20005
      Phone: (202) 898-2578
      Fax: (202) 898-2583
      Email: info@nasuad.org
      Website: http://www.nasuad.org/

     National Council on Aging (NCOA)

      NCOA
      251 18th Street South
      Suite 500
      Arlington, VA 22202
      Phone: 571-527-3900
      Website: https://www.ncoa.org/

     Justice in Aging

      1444 Eye Street
      NW Suite 1100
      Washington, DC 20005
      202-289-6976

      3660 Wilshire Boulevard
      Suite 718
      Los Angeles, CA 90010
      213-639-0930

      1330 Broadway
      Suite 525
      Oakland, CA 94612
      510-663-1055

      Website: http://www.justiceinaging.org/

NEW JERSEY OFFICES/ORGANIZATIONS that may offer information on Aging issues
and housing options.

     New Jersey State Department of Community Affairs (DCA)

      o Division of Codes and Standards
           Planned Real Estate Development           For information on condominiums,
           P. O. Box 805                             co-operatives and age-restricted
           Trenton, NJ 08625-0805                    communities



                                                                                        32
         (609) 984-7574
        Website http://www.nj.gov/dca/divisions/codes/offices/pred.html
    o Continuing Care Retirement                   For information or to discuss
      Community Section                            problems and/or file a complaint
        P. O. Box 805                              regarding CCRCs
        Trenton, NJ 08625-0805
         (609) 984-7574
        Website: http://www.nj.gov/dca/divisions/codes/offices/ccrc.html

    o Bureau of Rooming and                         For information or to discuss
      Boarding House Standards                      problems and/or file a complaint
         P. O. Box 804                              regarding Boarding Homes
         Trenton, NJ 08625-0804
         (609) 633-6251
         (609) 341-3187 Fax
         (609) 984-1706 Licensing
         Website: http://www.nj.gov/dca/divisions/codes/offices/roomingboarding.html


    o Bureau of Housing Inspection (BHI)              For information or to discuss
         P. O. Box 810                                problems and/or file a complaint
         Trenton, NJ 08625-0810                       regarding hotels and multiple
         (609) 633-6210                               dwellings.
         Website: http://www.nj.gov/dca/divisions/codes/offices/housinginspection.html


   New Jersey State Department of Health and Senior Services
      Website: http://www.state.nj.us/health/

    o NJ EASE (Easy Access, Single Entry)
         The State of New Jersey initiated the NJ EASE (Easy Access, Single Entry) program
         to provide easy, local access to a coordinated system of consumer responsive
         services. By using the State telephone number, individuals or caregivers can receive
         information on a variety of services designed to foster the independence and dignity
         of New Jersey citizens in need of assistance.
         (toll-free) (877) 222-3737                    From your home phone, to access
                                                       your area's Agency on Aging for
                                                       programs available in your county


    o Division of Aging Services                      For information and referral to
         NJ Department of Human Services              services for the elderly
         P. O. Box 715
         Trenton, NJ 08625-0715




                                                                                                33
           For Medicare counseling and general aging services questions: 1-800-792-8820
           For PAAD, Sr. Gold, or Lifeline: 1-800-792-9745
           For access to aging services in your county: 1-877-222-3737

           Website: http://www.state.nj.us/humanservices/doas/home/


    o Office of the Ombudsman for                        To file a complaint or to obtain
      the Institutionalized Elderly                      advocacy services, especially
          P.O. Box 852                                           relative to allegations of
          Trenton, NJ 08625-0852                         patient abuse .

           For general information call (609) 826-5090 or 1-877-582-6995

           To file a complaint call Toll Free Intake Line: 1-877-582-6995

           Email: ombudsman@advocate.state.nj.us

           Fax: 609-943-3479

           Website: http://www.nj.gov/ooie/



    o Division of Health Facilities                  Information on Health and
      Evaluation and Licensing                       Licensed Health facilities
         P. O. Box 367
         Trenton, NJ 08625-0367
         (800) 367-6543
         (800) 792-8820 – Medicare Counseling Office
         (800) 792-9770 – To register a complaint against a healthcare facility.

           Website: http://nj.gov/health/healthfacilities/



   New Jersey State Department of Human Services
      Website: http://www.state.nj.us/humanservices/

    o Division of Medical Assistance                             For information on Home Care
      and Health Services                                        Programs
         P. O. Box 712
         Trenton, NJ 08625-0712
         1-800-356-1561

           Website: http://www.state.nj.us/humanservices/dmahs/home/index.html



                                                                                                34
   New Jersey State Department of Human Services offers a package of community-based services
to eligible individuals through the Community Care Program for the Elderly and Disabled
(CCPED). The Department also offers full Medicaid benefits to individuals at risk of
institutionalization under the Home and Community Based Services for Blind and Disabled Adults
and Children Program. For more information call the Office of Home Care Programs or the nearest
Medicaid District Office.

      Other Toll-Free (800) Numbers to call

       o Social Security           1-800-772-1213

       o PAAD                     1-800-792-9745
         Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and Disabled
         Website: http://www.state.nj.us/humanservices/doas/services/paad/




                                                                                                  35
                                 APPENDIX VII


      Continuing Care Retirement Communities
            (CCRCs) Listings by County
BURLINGTON COUNTY:

     The Evergreens
      309 Bridgeboro Road, Moorestown, NJ 08057
      Phone: 1-877-590-6566
      Website: http://www.evergreens.org/

     Medford Leas
      One Medford Leas Way, Medford, NJ 08055
      Phone: 609-654-3000
      Website: http://www.medfordleas.org/

     Wiley Christian Retirement Community
      99 E. Main Street, Marlton, NJ 08053
      Phone: 856-983-0411
      Website: http://www.wileymission.org/index2.html

     Masonic Village
      902 Jacksonville Road, Burlington, NJ 08016
      Phone: 609-236-3900
      Website: http://www.njmasonic.org/



CAMDEN COUNTY

     Premier Cadbury at Cherry Hill
      2150 Route 38, Cherry Hill, NJ 08002
      Phone: 856-667-4550
      Website: http://www.premiercadbury.com/long-term-care/ltc-rehabilitation

     Cadbury Continuing Care at Home
      2317 Church Road, Cherry Hill, NJ 08002
      Phone: 856-667-5756
      Website: http://cadbury.org/at-home/



                                                                                 36
     The Fountains at Cedar Parke
      114 Hayes Mill Road, Atco, NJ 08004
      Phone: 856-753-2000
      Website: http://cedarparke.com/

     Lions Gate
      1110 Laurel Oak Road, Voorhees, NJ 08043
      Phone: 856-679-2200
      Website: https://www.lionsgateccrc.org/


ESSEX COUNTY:

     Crane’s Mill
      459 Passaic Avenue, West Caldwell, NJ 07006
      Phone: 973-276-6700
      Website: http://www.cranesmill.org/

     Winchester Gardens
      333 Elmwood Avenue, Maplewood, NJ 07040
      Phone: 973-762-5050
      Website: http://winchestergardens.com/



HUDSON COUNTY:

     Fritz Reuter Altenheim
      3161 Kennedy Boulevard, North Bergen, NJ 07047
      Phone: 201-867-3585
      Website: http://www.fritzreuter.com/



MERCER COUNTY:

     Meadow Lakes
      300 Meadow Lakes, East Windsor, NJ 08520
      Phone: 609-448-4100
      Website: http://www.meadowlakesonline.org/



MIDDLESEX COUNTY:

     Monroe Village


                                                       37
      One David Brainerd Drive, Jamesburg, NJ 08831
      Phone: 732-521-6400
      Website: http://www.monroevillageonline.org/



MONMOUTH COUNTY:

     Applewood Estates
      One Applewood Drive, Freehold, NJ 07728
      Phone: 732-303-7400
      Website: www.applewood.com

     The Atrium at Navesink Harbor
      40 Riverside Avenue, Red Bank, NJ 07701
      Phone: 732-842-3400
      Website: http://atriumatnavesink.org/

     Seabrook Village
      3000 Essex Road, Tinton Falls, NJ 07753
      Phone: 732-643-2005
      Website: https://www.ericksonliving.com/seabrook



MORRIS COUNTY

     The Oaks at Denville
      19 Pocono Road, Denville, NJ 07834
      Phone: 973-586-6000
      Website: http://www.oaksatdenville.org/

     Cedar Crest Village
      1 Cedar Crest Village Drive, Pompton Plains, NJ 07444
      Phone: 973-831-3500
      Website: https://www.ericksonliving.com/cedar-crest



OCEAN COUNTY:

     Crestwood Manor
      50 Lacey Road, Whiting, NJ 08759
      Phone: 732-849-4900
      Website: http://crestwoodmanoronline.org/


                                                              38
     Harrogate
      400 Locust Street, Lakewood, NJ 08701
      Phone: 732-905-7070
      Website: http://www.harrogatelifecare.org/

     The Pines at Whiting
      509 Route 530, Whiting, NJ 08759
      Phone: 732-849-0400
      Website: http://www.thepinesatwhiting.org/



PASSAIC COUNTY:

     Holland Christian Home
      151 Graham Avenue, North Haledon, NJ 07508
      Phone: 908-595-6500
      Website: http://www.hchnj.org/



SALEM COUNTY:

     Friends Village at Woodstown
      One Friends Drive, Woodstown, NJ 08098
      Phone: 856-769-1500
      Website: http://friendsvillage.org/



SOMERSET COUNTY:

     Arbor Glen at Bridgewater
      100 Monroe Street, Bridgewater, NJ 08807
      Phone: 908-595-6500
      Website: http://www.arborglen.org/

     Fellowship Village
      8000 Fellowship Road, Basking Ridge, NJ 07920
      Phone: 908-580-3800
      Website: www.fellowshipseniorliving.org

     Fellowship Village Senior Living at Home
      8000 Fellowship Road, Basking Ridge, NJ 07920


                                                      39
      Phone: 1-877-392-5813
      Website: www.fellowshipseniorliving.org

     Stonebridge at Montgomery
      100 Hollinshead Spring Road, Skillman, NJ 08558
      Phone: 609-759-3672
      Website: http://www.stonebridgeatmontgomery.org/



SUSSEX COUNTY:

     Bristol Glen
      200 Bristol Glen Drive, Newton, NJ 07860
      Phone: 973-831-3500
      Website: https://bristolglen.umcommunities.org/



UNION COUNTY

     Lantern Hill
      535 Mountain Avenue, New Providence, NJ 07974
      Phone: 1-800-824-5939
      Website: https://www.ericksonliving.com/lantern-hill




WARREN COUNTY:

     House of the Good Shepherd
      798 Willow Grove Street, Hackettstown, NJ 07840
      Phone: 908-684-5900
      Website: https://www.hotgs.org




                                                             40
                             APPENDIX VIII


    Continuing Care Retirement Communities
          (CCRCs) at Home Programs

   Fellowship Village Senior Living at Home
    8000 Fellowship Road, Basking Ridge, NJ 07920
    Phone: 1-877-392-5813
    Website: www.fellowshipseniorliving.org


   Cadbury Continuing Care at Home
    2317 Church Road, Cherry Hill, NJ 08002
    Phone: 856-667-5756
    Website: http://cadbury.org/at-home/




                                                    41
                                   APPENDIX IX

         “Bill of Rights for Continuing Care
         Retirement Community Residents in
               Independent Living Act”
            (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-360.1, et seq.)
This is only a summary of your rights under the Bill of Rights for Continuing Care
 Retirement Community Residents in Independent Living Act (P.L. 2013, c. 167,
 N.J.S.A. 52:27D-360.1, et seq.). You may have other rights provided under this
                     statute and other state or federal laws.

                      List of Residents’ Rights
Medical Care
    To refuse medication and treatment after you have been informed of the possible
     consequences of this decision.
    To choose a physician, advanced practice nurse, or physician assistant.
    To view or receive a copy of your own medical record, free of charge.
    To participate, either personally or through a legal representative, in all decisions regarding
     your own health care.
    To receive, upon request, a complete explanation of your medical condition, any
     recommended treatment, and the possible benefits or risks involved.
    To execute an advance directive concerning the use of life-sustaining treatment. You may
     appoint a legal representative with a durable power of attorney to act on your behalf with
     regard to health care decisions, and you can expect that the provisions of the advance directive
     will be executed to the fullest extent possible.
    If you are insured by a health maintenance organization (HMO), you have the right to be
     referred by your primary care physician to the nursing care unit that is part of your facility,
     provided that the unit has the capacity needed, and that the facility accepts the applicable
     reimbursement rate. This right also applies to any resident being discharged from a hospital.
    The facility must help you access any Medicare, Medicaid, or other applicable programs.
    To serve or participate in a local, state, or national residents’ association, or other similar
     organizations, without discrimination or reprisal.
    To retain and exercise all constitutional, civil and legal rights to which you are entitled.
    To be treated with respect, courtesy, consideration and dignity.




                                                                                                        42
Freedom from Abuse
    To serve or participate in a local, state, or national residents’ association, or other similar
     organizations, without discrimination or reprisal.
    To retain and exercise all constitutional, civil and legal rights to which you are entitled.
    To be treated with respect, courtesy, consideration and dignity.


Discharges and Transfers
    To occupy your chosen unit for as long as you can function independently, with or without
     the assistance of an aide or aides. The following exceptions may apply:
             1. you have violated the continuing care agreement or facility rules;
             2. the facility has cancelled the agreement with sufficient notice and cause; or
             3. the facility decides to raze or cease operating the structure, or the part of it in which
             your unit is located.
    Any determination that you cannot function independently, with or without the assistance of
     an aide or aides, shall be made by the facility's Director of Medical Services. The facility shall
     notify you, in writing, of your appeal rights.
    To receive every service, as contracted in the continuing care agreement executed upon
     admission, unless waived in writing, with the exception of changes required by state or federal
     law.


Privacy and Self Determination
    To privacy within your unit, except that personnel must be admitted for contracted services or
     to respond to an emergency or complaint.
    To hire a private caregiver or companion at your expense and responsibility.
    To receive guests and visitors at the facility.
    To allow guests to stay for a reasonable temporary period of time, in a guest apartment or unit
     in the facility, subject to reasonable policies and procedures.
    To leave and return to your unit at will, providing you inform the facility if you will be
     temporarily absent overnight, or for a longer period of time. The facility shall notify residents
     in writing as to whether they will be charged a per diem fee during any such time that they are
     absent from the facility.


Visits and Activities

    To receive guests and visitors at the facility.



                                                                                                            43
    To allow guests to stay for a reasonable temporary period of time, in a guest apartment or unit
     in the facility, subject to reasonable policies and procedures.
    To leave and return to your unit at will, providing you inform the facility if you will be
     temporarily absent overnight, or for a longer period of time. The facility shall notify residents
     in writing as to whether they will be charged a per diem fee during any such time that they are
     absent from the facility.


Finances and Contract Issues
    To receive 30-days advance written notice prior to any fee increase.
    To appoint a legal representative with a durable power of attorney to handle financial matters.
    If you request it, the facility must provide you with a fee schedule for any uncovered services
     before you agree to them.
    The facility shall not modify or reduce the scope of provided services, with the exception of
     modifications required by state or federal assistance programs, without providing residents with a
     minimum of 30-days prior notice. You have the right to cancel your continuing care contract with
     the facility for any reason upon giving 60-days written notice. You will then have a right to a full
     or partial refund of your entrance fee as provided in your contract or as required by law.
    You have the right to 60-days written notice if the facility wishes to cancel your contract. This
     right is subject to certain conditions provided by law, including the requirement for “just cause.”
     You also have the right to challenge the facility’s notice of cancellation by requesting a hearing.
     You may also have the right to a full or partial refund of your entrance fee, as provided by law.
    You have the right to remain in the facility even if you are experiencing financial difficulties,
     subject to certain limitations provided by law.
    If you are experiencing financial difficulties, you may investigate thoroughly with the facility any
     financial assistance which may be available in order to allow you to remain in the facility. The
     facility must also provide sustaining charitable assistance, subject to certain conditions permitted
     by law.
    If you vacate the facility and you are entitled to a full or partial refund, the facility must refund
     your entrance fee, less certain deductions permitted by law.

Protection of Rights

    To expect the facility to resolve your concerns in a timely manner.
    To express complaints without fear of interference, discharge, or reprisal.
    To contact the Office of the Ombudsman for the Institutionalized Elderly or any
     advocate or agency which provides health, social, legal, or other services to advocate on
     behalf of residents if you feel that your rights are being violated.
    To request from the facility, and receive without undue delay or cost, a copy of the rights of
     nursing home, assisted living and continuing care retirement community residents.




                                                                                                             44
