                              Reading Group Guide

                               Discussion Questions

1. Hendrik opens his diary with “the decision to give the world a little taste of the
   real Hendrik Groen.” He says he has always been a people-pleaser, always
   avoided confrontation, but now he’s going to shock everyone with “an uncensored
   exposé.” Do you think the incorrigible, irreverent character we come to know
   over the course of the diary is the “real” Hendrik? How would you characterize
   who he really is, and does that differ from the character he is presenting to us?
   How do you think he changes over the course of the story?

2. Hendrik’s friend Evert believes that “the only point of being alive is to kill time as
   pleasantly as possible.” Do you agree? What would you say it means to really
   “live”? Does this change as we age?

3. Hendrik and Evert are best friends but very different as individuals. Why do you
   think they have such a strong bond? What does the novel have to teach us about
   friendship, particularly between two men late in life?

4. Discuss the development of the relationship between Hendrik and Eefje. Does it
   turn out the way you expected? Why or why not? What do you think they see in
   one another that gives them this special connection?

5. Over the course of the year, Hendrik will form close friendships with the other
   members of the Old But Not Dead Club. How does each of these new friends
   shape or change Hendrik, for better or worse? Are there particular friends in your
   life who have changed you?

6. If you had to plan a trip for the Old But Not Dead Club, where would you go and
   what would you do there?

7. Hendrik describes old age as following “the same trajectory as a baby developing
   into an adult, only the other way ʼround.” Do you think he’s right?

8. Hendrik has sworn to never let himself be turned into a dull, hopeless old person,
   but he can’t nail down a specific obstacle or infirmity that would, for him, be a
   final tipping point. He describes this as like being a “frog in a pot of water,” a
   situation in which each new indignity seems unacceptable until it arrives, at which
   point he decides he can cope until the next one. Why do you think he keeps
   moving the goalpost? Where would you draw the line for yourself? Do you see
   his reluctance as weakness or strength? How does this contrast with Grietje’s
   assertion that “every fine day is one more day”?

9. In June, Management creates controversy and anger among the residents by
   announcing that they’ll be installing cameras in the care home’s corridors. Do you
   agree or disagree with this decision, and why? For the elderly or for anyone: What
   is the line between safety and freedom?

10. The Secret Diary is full of humorous lines and unexpected physical comedy. Talk
    about your favorite funny scene from the book.

11. Toward the end of his diary, after a tragedy at the residence, Hendrik writes: “I
    can’t make the reality prettier than it is: sad, grim and funny all at once.” Most of
    the time, Hendrik seems to choose to see the “funny” in everything; do you agree
    with this attitude? Why or why not?

                             Q & A with Hendrik Groen

Where did the idea for the novel come from? What was the hardest part of
writing it, or the easiest?

On the one hand you have the old people who are shuffling toward the inevitable
end—sighing, complaining, and submissive. On the other hand you have senior
citizens who manage to complete the last stage with dignity, good cheer, and
contentment. That mix of sadness, humor, strength, and weakness fascinates me, and
that’s what is at the heart of this book.

You write with tremendous tenderness about your characters, even as you
highlight the comedy of their personality quirks and situations. Do you have
favorite people or scenes in the book? Why do you think the characters act the
way they do?

I am polite and friendly myself, cautiously critical and moderately optimistic. A touch
unhappy with myself, because I’d really prefer to be more like my friend Evert: stoic,
blunt, and a rebel. Eefje, in her own charming way, possesses the same qualities. The
thought of her sometimes makes my heart skip a beat. I am equally fond of the rest of
the Old But Not Dead Club. They’re not members of the club for nothing. But I also
have a soft spot, tempered with exasperation, for the cantankerous Bakker and the
conniving Slothouwer sisters.

The book has become a huge worldwide bestseller. Is that connected to your
decision to remain anonymous? What has surprised you the most about the
book’s reception, or connection to its audiences?

I think the book’s success has to do with two irrefutable realities:
       1. Everyone hopes to have a healthy old age.
       2. Old age comes with ailments.
Everyone can relate. Even if you don’t identify with it yourself, you’ll recognize your
father or mother, grandpa or grandma.
       Hopefully, the fact that I prefer to not be in the spotlight has had only a very
minor effect on my book’s popularity.
      What has moved me most is that many old people have been inspired by my
book to not give up on life but to mine even these last years for all they have to offer.
Apparently a number of Old But Not Dead clubs have seen the light. Hendrik is proud
as punch about that.
