The two men stood close to the white truck with the black tail gate. 
Water dripped off the bumper from the recently cleaned chaps from the gator egg hunt. 
"Pound for pound, which one is stronger an poled Hereford bull or an american alligator," 
the younger bald man asked the older bald man who answers, 
"It is not a contest, the gator.
The older man went on to describe why he felt this way by mentioning each creatures' 
bite force, other abilities, and natural defenses.


Many players want to engage enemies using only magic. Picking up a gun feels almost
like cheating to them, especially when faced with high-quality security weapons. This
can be frustrating for mercenaries and lifesprenuers who need to fire armor-piercing
bullets or use explosive weaponry when required. How do you keep these players
happy?
Being. Laughing. Hunting. Sleeping.
Thinking. Loving. Telling.
Wishing. Working. Wondering.
One of the best ways is through granting an instinctive reaction to danger. Non-humans and
some high-end corp security may have armor, so you'll want to provide firepower that can
both match and bypass this personal protection.
This is all in addition to security measures designed to keep metahumans (orks, trolls,
gargoyles, etc) under control.
You stand next to a man with a chiseled face broing out next to a white truck. You ask, "Pound for pound which is stronger and Polled Hereford Herford or an American Alligator?"
"I didn't know they had gators in this county."
"They don't." You pull off the gag and hand him the clipboard.
He looks shocked. "You drugged me! Why would you do that, Elios?"
"Contracts can be extremely dull. You looked like you could use a laugh. That's why I sent Fire to pick you up."
He shakes his head, but he's still smiling slightly.
You ask ,"Do not shy away from answering the question. Release the answer."
He lets out a single soft chuckle before looking you in the eyes. "Well played. Fire is right. You are a funny lady."
You give an unassuming shrug and say, "The bonuses keep my family eating and the security business running. It's not always easy."
You pop open the doors of your truck and toss him a bottle of water before sitting down. He gets in the passenger seat as Fire hops in the back!
You mention, "I so want to get high."
He asks, "Not high on life?"
"I literally almost died-"
You quietly hum a song from your childhood. He joins in and you gun the truck
down the road. At least one of you is enjoying the high of life.
You ask again, "bull gator or bull cow."
"Gator," he replies.
"Even if a low-dose of voluntary hallucinogens make up less than a ounce of their body weight, the beasts understan-"
"Bull gator," he replies with excitement.
"As you wish." You turn down one of the many dirt roads that branch off from your current position. The tall grass slaps against the truck as you travel deeper into the wilderness.
You wonder how many clutches of eggs would be found today. It's the question that drives you. Will you find enough to feed your family and make a profit? Who knows. But the eggs are where the money makers lay, no doubt.
You bet that... sigh... You wish you'd brought your banjo. These old bones aren't as young as they used to be, make the journeys much harder. At least there's Fire. That boy is something else, through and through. Maybe I should take him to one of those city schools...
At a city school he would learn hundreds of new things every day. But then, I would lose him.
It is this conflict that prevents you from taking him to a city.
You pull over in a patch of knee high grass. Hayes and Fire hop out to open up the storage
of the truck that contains your weapons, binoculars, and tools for gathering the cluch eggs and glow
eggs. It takes two people to open it because the cluch are fairly territorial beasts.
The mother alligators guard the clutch with 
terrible fierceness. Fire tells Hayes an alligator story that begins 
"once upon a time...."
You smile. About twenty years ago, it was country songs on the radio and farmer John 
tales around the campfire. The world, you think, is a far different place now.
Where there used to be cotton fields, there are now vast solar farms. Once poisonous crops were grown on certain plots, but are now reserved for vegetables. The mountain range that dominates the landscape holds vast reserves of uranium.
The same uranium use to mutate the alligator dna into 
the Beasts once ruled as pets, until the owner lost control.
Now the beasts are more common than the housecat.
).
You sling the winchester into the crook of your arm and pull a small leather pouch of tranquilizer darts and
a large, heavy bolt action rifle. Hayes takes a small paintball shotgun and Fire a simple nylon strap used to grab cluch eggs (They often gouge and scratch with their beaks). You enter the field.
Hayes unlocks the gate. Fire beats back the beasts with a long pole with a pipe fitting tied to the end. They all growl and 
crawl the mud around their feet until 
it is safe to pass. You, Hayes and Fire begin the egg gathering walk.
Cluach eggs are large, football sized and leathery. They often 
turn a pale blue before hatching.
Glow eggs are smaller than even your little finger, perfect spheres made of solid, glowing 
uranium 235.
You grabbing pontoon boat off back of trailer attached to atv. Headlamps on, each holding a lantern of 
some sort. Take the river to the industrial park and search for 
Empire eggs. Government now controls all resources so plenty more 
opportunities, but harder to come and with much larger predators.
You placing the pontoon boat in to speckled green water hole, when
Fire drops the buckets of moss into the back of the boat.
You listening to the call of a bird landing in a tree above 
branch cracks, but don't turn...
Who could it be, out in these parts? I pull my hood down 
and turn around to see a girl dressed in camouflage, carrying a
loaded crossbow, approaching us. Behind her is a force of
about six tribals with a long grunt. You make a half hearted attempt 
to scare them off with the hood, but soon recognize 
this group.
You learn the motives behind the approaching tribe as they screech 
and move toward the boat with furious 
cheers and wanting 
fight us for taking their egg.
The weapons they carry include tribals long spears
The girl dressed in camouflage shouts as she turns to run to 
meet us with her crossbow 
aimed, she is very quick so you must see find out more about her on your journey.
You need to make a decision now and it doesn't look good but choose carefully....
Quick fix! Your tiredness will influence your choices on what to do next...
"It is time to leave," says the girl in camo "they are almost here" 
The tribals are coming up faster then expected. You sli
They are catching up to us, you see more and more lights dancing close to the trees. It's useless to fight them in this state of mind. et on board the boat followed by Hayes and Fire. The trio of machines concetrates on getting away as quick as possible, but the task is rendered difficult by a small mudland blocking your route into the industrial park.
The industrial park touches the edge of the Okeenokee swamp on the 
Noon side of the city. It consists mainly of old, now abandon warehouses and factories being used as hangouts for ravers, cyberpunks 
and other idle groups too cool to work.
It also is host to the lowest order of humanity groups: The Devihackers. These are generally recognized as the scum of the earth. Their leader is an individual they call 'The Priest' who is rumoured to have made a pact with the devil himself.
The group of egg collectors paddle faster through the mud lane but 
tribe are gaining. Very soon now, the lead cyberguiar is upon you. He raises his crossbow bolts ready to drill into your forehead.
Quickly, you reach for your only hope: an EMP grenade hooked around your belt. This might very well destroy your evidence but it could also fry the tribal... and your chip.
He fire as you throw the explosive at him, it flys and lands at his feet.
The mud spurts all over the face of the cybergatherer wh
oses eyes widen as he realizes what is about to happen. It explodes in a flash of light and the tribesman, the kids and yourself are all thrown from the river with burning skin. You flip in the air and hit the waters knee deep. Your left foot is stuck in mud however. Hitting you when falling, a rock has knocked you out from under you.
All the tribe members jump in the water to remove the effects of the flames until they are tolerable again. Hayes and Fire run into shade to escape being spotted. Trapped by your foot, you can not go seek chrisht and rer in the shade Either you sacrifce your foot to the mud of hold your ground...
Damp mud is oozing over your feet that are trapped under the mud.
Two eleven foot alligators rise out of the brackish waters next to the feet of the tribal leader.
The jaws of the male gator wheeze open to reveal two rows of razor teeth before it snaps them together and rips the tribesman's legs off. The screams can be heard for miles around.
The female gator attacks the screaming tribal leader mauling him in his tracks.
The four other tribal members attempt to swim away. 
The female gator swims after them. 
Her jaws take care of two of them, though they are seriously wounded and struggle.
The gator snaps at the last two but loses interesst and eventually lets them go.
Water is starting to fill the boots of your protective gear You have let yourself be trapped like a rat. You go for the knife hooked onto your belt in one swift motion.
Be honsest.
The girl in camo wish for revenge.
She runs back in the shadows of the swamp.
Be honsest.
You begin to hack your foot free from the mud as thick, painful blood shoots through your veins. The blades on your knife are as sharp as a mirror and they cut with mincing precision.
Shaking the mud from your cleats, you get up but a deep bone-ache hits you like a sack of bricks An arrow lies bleeding in the back of your knee.
Fire finds the first nest but the mother can not be seen. Three young ones are left behind.
You grit your teeth as you kneel by the 
They gulp down the goatmeat and spit blood back at you.
You crawl back the weeds and grass the alligator used a bedding for the nest.
You feel the mud squeal from under hunters and creep.
You stand over wake, looking after you with milky eyes of decay an end to the life of this tiny innocent..
Not it is time for you to leave this place stand!
Moving forward onto your blood leg pack you set off into a hobble have mercy on yourself no more and pick up the pace. You are closer to baron now.