You brawling with a monster and 
losing Hunting down a monster in the swamps of the okeenokee is a desperate man vs nature adventure role playing.
You brawling with a monster and losing
o a monster in the swamps of the t's a desperate man vs nature adventure role playing.
Hunting down a monster in the swamps of the okeenokee is a desperate man vs nature adventure role playing. You're sitting on a table in the 'Camp George' looking over a map with Captain Branikov, a middle-aged Aztechnology employee that the company sent out to make sure this deal goes smoothly, which you're starting to doubt it will.
, but

 they sent you out to try and drum up new business with a map of all the places alligators have been spotted
It isn't far from here that you were almost taken out by a swampay who aimed for you instead of the driver
A desperate man who is going to fail at everything he starts, but
Does 
Likes to drive fast but irresponsible ad always survives
Plays a wicked game of poker
is ready to save the day.
It paid well, but you're not likely to do it again.

Checking the date to figure out what is to be done today
Watching the time to see if you have awoken
Early enough not to be late
Confirming what you are wearing will be acceptable
Finding your way to the site in time
Checking the news on smart phone for insights into interviewer
Confirming all keys, wallet and phone are present
You find a parking spot a block away and set off to meet the team of people who you hope will get this contract with Aztechnology.
 After wandering a bit through the multistory maze that is the Aztechnology administrative building, slipping past security and navigating up to the correct floor you come to a room numbers 219. There you wait outside as three other grips are gathered.
Lizards with venom that can make you wish for death but not grant it, bees that can cause feverish hallucinations that persist for weeks and plants that can literally explode. All very scary, you try to keep your cool as you wait.
You are with three other crew members to retrieve samples for a research lab.
When the woman who has been sent to get you comes to get you she from the look of her is completely terrified, with visibly shaking hands, pale skin and dark circles under her eyes.
Never get it
Then standing around won't get you there any faster
Looking at the woman as you approach her, she's about 28 human years, Koreatown resident, single with no kids and has been working in STAR laboratories about as long as you have.
Most importantly right now
Picking up your pace to close the perceived gap you say
Taking a knee so your eyes are level with hers you say
The woman slaps you.
"Snap out of it and listen when I'm talking to you!
Watching the time to see if you have awoken early enough
You work on a an alligator far in a swamp just outside N.O.
You sell the american alligator egg and meat raised in the company lab. It's very profitable in Korea and china right now. The problem: you need to keep a close eye on your alligator maws because they tend to get poachers.
Waking at the crack of dawn isn't natural to you but given what you face it sure is necessary!
Deciding to call in sick today because you went out too late and drank too much last night
After a few alarm cycles you give up trying to sleep and just head to work. At least you won't have all those stairs to climb.
There is a feel to do it just right when catching a lizard. Even one with venom that can cause hallucinations for two weeks just by biting someone and laying a single egg inside their body.
Thinking about how the lizard is going to react to you is like all animals, unpredictable. You don't always know what they are thinking until they do it but if you watch them long enough you can get a feel for it.
You never are sick and you don't like lying down
The boss will think you have soft head but
It is a dying business and you can't afford health care
You are a cattle driver not a doctor
Jack wants to hurry up and get this over with, you however want to take a slower pace and make sure the gator don't escape. With you already having to drive out into the swamp to find them in the first place, they already have a tendancy to have gone off a little from the area where you snare them so you don't want to rush it. It also wouldn't help that last time you were trying to hurry.
Checking the time to see if you have awoken early enough
You wake up and turn your cheap alarm off the mattress of one night stands. You're buying a new one soon, it's been almost a year and the frame sinks deep in the middle from your nearly nightly loading into it. Which often leaves you searching for your phone at the bottom of the cavern that is your bed.
Getting ready for a walk in the park for an hour or so
"Don't roll around too much or the bed might swallow you up like Alice."
Kidnap victims and idiots fall for the old centipedes in the bed trick all the time.
Get out of bed and face smacking one in the face
One of the last things you have to do is go check up on your secret gator gig but you gave your notice so who knows how long it'll take them to get a new guy in or if they even will at all. This whole charade is starting to get to you too.
Horny gay men don't get married and move to the suburbs
Then again neither do sociopaths
It was all going well just having that one extra bit of mystery about the whole situation
Killing the time wondering if they are already dead or alive
You should be able to go buy yourself another few months if you play this right. Who knows, maybe they'll just blame everything on partying and burning the place down.
You are tired of this dead end job anyhow
It is time for some more excitement out there in the world as a whole and the risk is more than worth the reward.
Going through all your stuff you realize three things:
You need to get back into better shape, you need to start driving again since you haven't in a while, and you are way under prepared for anything like this.
Even working at a grocery store you should have an extra 20 dollars a week for emergancy saving not to mention what nicking stuff from work might net you.
You must find something different to do before striking out on your own.
You are in decent shape but you are terribly out of practice and those survival shows on TV never tell the whole truth even if they are mostly true.
You could easily jog and walk for fifteen miles a day and not really feel like you had done anything at all but you haven't done that in so long that you would be incredibly sore for a few days after .
The inevitable casualty that happens to men of your age in horrible ways
Also you have developed a minor tremor in your hands which while mostly fadeable can be a pain especially when doing something fast like driving.
Your saving grace is that with everything else you do, finding a new career won't take all that much time. You already spend most of it laying around or sitting on your bum watching TV, you might as well start getting paid something for it.
You vaugely remember talk of some sort of government job listing at the post office that
You pasted on the way to work yesterday
Wondering if you should apply or what the requirements would be anyway.
Grumpier than normal because your feet hurt (New shoes still feeling weird) You limp into the office and slam your hands on the counter bell a few times to get attention
Same old bored looking guy comes out with a scowl "What?"
Seeking death in a rough industry is tempting for its short term amusement value but you imagine that staying alive might be more worthwhile in the long run
"Got any jobs open?"
The guy is silent for a few seconds as if thinking really hard about it "Nope."
"What about the government job listing that was here?"
"Hah, that was months ago. There are no government jobs available within a thousand miles of here. Move to D.C.
Like working with vicious animals or mold, bosses are the only constant in this world
Feeling that stabbing pain from your feet again you head home.
Angry at the whole situation and especially your won uselessness you decide to do something crazy like read a book. Reading about somebody else's hardships is much easier than facing your own and you need a virtuoso performance to escape your rut.
Dealing with unexploded cluster bombs
You return to the Yellow Pages and look up disease clinics since you figure that any place taking care of people with highly infectious deadly diseases is bound to be understaffed and low paying.
Perhaps there is another option out there for someone like you with few skills and an arrest record
A close look reveals that it isn't really a clinic at all since it doesn't seem to do normal medical procedures.
It's just a place that incinerates hazardous waste so common sense says that the pay is even worse than a clinic but the idea of working around diseases and perhaps even horrifying genetic abominations is still amusing to you right now and you aren't going to pass up an opportunity to poke fun at your misery.
Creative last words "Man I don't feel like going into work today"
Watching televsion all day and eating whatever you want isn't a great life but you endure.
TV food IS just as bad for you as Real life food! The lies we tell ourselves
Lying in bed you watch another noisy junker race past the window, it's only disturbing because you are attempting to sleep.
The car alarm goes off next, which causes your dog to bark incessantly at the poor suffering car.
Passing of time quickly
Slowly passing of the time
Days off are spent passed out
What is the point of leaving the house if alcohol is cheap and there are no job prospects?
When you live at your parents house, it's like a permanent vacation
Waiting to die...
Easily accesible from grocery stores and gas stations, you often get everything you need from the local Strip Mall.
Dying at 40....
No it is worse! Having no childhood at all you grew up very fast and took a lot of responsibility upon yourself.
While your peers were out playing cartmeils at age 10 you had your first legal job filing papers. Being agoraphobic jail would be just as bad for you except for the free Food.
REALLY dying at 40....
They even deliver here! By car, the giant brick buildings are far enough apart to require automation.
At least you hope it is automation and not workers given that they are always breaking down and setting goods ablaze.
Bye-Bye Visa!
You can pay a dollar for the cheapest stuff or splurge for three and get the fancy stuff shipped which you always do since you don't got much company.
Although it's basically rubbing alcohol with a hint of antiseptic it doesn't break the bank and your stomach can handle half a bottle before the inevitable happens.
Coming up next on Channel 7 news....
The only TV you watch is the local news just to see if anyone you know has passed away and the police are looking for a a missing person inquiry.
Sometimes, they even say your name since you haven't been in contact with friends and family for years.
Even insomnia all the time but i can't stop trying to sleep
Even hotschedules can't keep you awake and you work all nighters just fine.
First few times it happened you thought you maybe just fell asleep then one day you wake up in a chair and were blurry vision could see at least six different sunrises through the window.
With melting globs of wax for ears it is amazing that you can hear anything at all. You didn't even know they did overnight bus routes anymore.
There would be a knock a the door
You pay no mind to the knock on the door as your mind starts to shut down for another cycle.
Your boss says if you don't shape up, you'll be driving a tow-truck next week. Driving always made you motion sick and landing accidents were so common at the airport...
A loud bang that is quickly followed by someone screaming in agony
This is soon followed be running, shouting, and a series of bangs like a car backfiring.
Just like in the cowboy movies, you jump out of bed grab your pistol from under your pillow and hit the door running.
Holding the door slightly ajar you...
See nothing out of place. Not that you would expect anything else. This is just another nightmare that won't go away.
Quickly muffled with a wooshing sound, you hear the elevator doors close at the far end of the hallway.
Great! This time you'll get that promotion for sure.
Thirty minutes later you are heading back with your tail between your legs. There was nobody there, the surveillance cameras all had their wires chewed through and even the engine of your bus has been stripped and all that is left are some disconnected wires.
Armored men with guns crowding around an elevator did not look at all like a group of people who were there to help you.
Your hero days are over.
Too bad this is not a movie or you could have easily swapped the bags before getting busted or even made off with both bags but what are you gonna do now?
You won't leave your body for the rats and the sewers don't give out prizes so it's settled.
A rope in the back of your mom's old shed along with a quick check behind you will do nicely.
The tyrant would be there screaming and wailing the whole time as you fall asleep.
Cussing and hitting you
The finger that used to point at you is now pointing up
Doesn't take long before your sister and mom are getting all your stuff sold off or thrown away.
A few months later they sell the house and fly down to Florida to live with your aunt.
The address on the head stone just says R.I.P. and has a makeshift cross carved into it so when they find it in a few decades some holy roller will think they've found the Messiah.
Now a blood stump at the the red hot rage of a thousand suns screams at the heavens as the rest of you falls upon itself like wet sand giving way to form an empty hole.
Birds eating at your eyes and maggot infested lumps wiggle free into the void that is now the inside of you.
What little heat still lingered around your heart is gone.
You spiraled once or twice upon the Line but never again.
One night stands that don't even qualify as mediocre Pranks.
How pathetic.
A brass ring for your riding away into the sunset ending?
You didn't even have a pony to ride away on; you were just pushing someone else's merchant stall while snarling at kids for getting in the way.
Activities getting worse and worse each time. Gone from cruel and unusual to cruel and lazy.
Why even bother?
Kidnap victims and
Gays are happy you are gone.
You miss the gays. They are nicer than parents could ever hope to be and don't even care that you are leaving a blight of stupid in your wake.
It's like old loves; sometimes you just need to let them go but you'll never forget them.
Back to the circus knife thrower who had the grace and beauty of an artist and colored outside the lines. Dipping beautiful portraits in hot water until the thick permanent ink died into pastels...
Clawhammer beats to play but
Your replacement is doing fine.
Bubba went out jogging one day not too long ago and
Didn't return. Rotten meat is found out back on a skewer still dripping blood and your still are being cleaned out.
Crossing Mr. Fel Chested off the pre-show Prayer.
Keeping kids in line a low paying job now.
Gal began selling herself out earlier and earlier in the morning until she just didn't come home one day.
An alligator's jaw can crush bone but
Still slice through flesh easily.
Became a nameless ghost story
You assume the cotton mouth is responsible.
Only one with a motive and it never forgave him.
It was so hard to forgive him too.
Rotten food, no air conditioning, overflowing toilets, incompetent staff, animal attacks, hazing, stabbings...
Hell of an opportunity while the steep roller coaster drop of Americana gave way to a new decade.
Listening to the tyrant tell you the story of the alligator attack on your teacher while you fondled her melon sized bosoms.
You've been standing here for more than a half hour and just as she finished her story she cut off your head and is now waving it at the crowd.
"My clairvoyant senses told me he would come to haunt us today!" The cycle begins again.
You point your blood stump finger at him and
You point your blood stump finger at him and shove him in
One last laugh as your blood squirts into his eyes before he rips out your still beating heart and takes your place up there in the blazing sun.
You noticing the type of clothing on what is left of the arm while you sort the rest of his chopped up body into the mystery meat bucket.
Only to find it has already been stripped from the bone and has barely any gristle to be found like all the rest. It just fell into this sorry mess while you were reorganizing it all.
You've hit rock bottom and then some
You can't do it anymore. You haven't slept in three days but instead of speeding up like usual it's slowing down.
hut, hut, hut, hutt, hutt, hutt
Why is it getting dark so early?
hut, hut hut HUT motherfucker!
Sorry about that guys. I think I'm alittle tired.
BARREL ROLL!
So this is the end huh? Everything is so vivid yet feels like I'm watching a play from afar. Calling all the shots but not in control of any of my own.
"miserable...life"
Can't even say it myself, I got to rip off that guy from ed wood. Guess I'm just following the leader of pseudo-intellectuals at this point, there's nowhere left to sho...
Did I just finish that joke?
The arm of the tyrant had been taken by the jaws of the alligator and you are free at last as his paintings become a reality and the entire world is colored with your blood.
Deciding to shower and go to work
The back of the convenience store is pretty well stocked with beer though. Might as well start there right? Right...
Allison waits patiently for you to stop staring at the brown stains (Yogurt?) on her chest long enough to actually focus on her face
Then you mock her silly unexciting job in customer service while she gives you the name of some bar trivia place
That's how it always starts.
A blast of shampoo to clean yourself of the past and the lingering smell of death as you step into the springtime light
Remembering what clothes you left here after last weekend's rager, you switch on some music
Spring is in full effect, it really is a beautiful day today
It's been years since you've driven to this part of town. Not much had changed actually though..
What kind of shampoo is it
The thoughts you own flow like bubbles down the pipe to your minds septic tank
Them: "wow he didn't show"
You: "yeah, music's pretty good on the way here though"
Then into the bar
Playing a few old arcade games before you start feeling old enough to not feel old when next to high-schoolers
Except you are now
The bubble of yourself is finally broken with a mixture of boredom and self-pity until you see her walk in with a few other girls.
You noticing the color of the pipe changes is vaguely interesting to you for a few seconds
Long enough for you to talk over your initial panic attack
Sorry who are you again? I mean no offense but you do all look the same with your long dyed hair, black clothes and........................................................................... make up?!
Normally this would be the part where you find out what's under the boring exterior but tonight that isn't on the agenda.
You place yourself in a relaxed state of mind and bring the beer to your lips. It's always a good start
And then........
Washing the blood and grime off of you feels really good right now. None of it is your own so there's no point in stressing about it.
Drying off you stare into the mirror at the bruises already forming on your face. It's almost like seeing an old friend after all these years and you're shocked to learn it has been nearly a decade since you went full-on cholo, hipster would just be too much of a haha!Douche move wouldn't it?
You wish the blood to be colored back in but that will have to wait until the next time you sleep. Is this what Uncle Greg felt like when he was beating up on you and mom for laughs?
Yeah it probably was.
Dragging yourself over to your ratty old bed you give out a sigh thinking how there just never seems to be enough time in one day anymore.
Time moves so slow and you are forgeting where you have been and how it got you to where you are but going forward... forward is a very different story.
You have to go feed. You already (Maybe) know where the vampire's residence is so that just leaves finding one of those Lil blood bags.
Fortunatley, there are copious amounts of drunken students dancing in front of a nondescript warehouse about 5 blocks down. Shouldn't take long to smell out a couple of them from there.
Afterwards............ You aren't quite sure. Uncle Greg you knew how he was going to be before you even made the choice.
The favorite food of the champion includes the blood of virgins. As much as this sickens you, you are stuck with this being for the rest of your 'life'.
What ever that may be. Most humans get roughly 70 more years barring accidents or health complications etc.
This thing beside you though? It can live forever and in theory never age past maturity. You have no idea if it's currently 30 or 3000.
The monster before you doesn't move so much as it disappears into the darkness around your room.
Moving in out of the slower with maximum speed is still unnerving to you. What once was your sanctuary, is now more like a toxic waste zone.
You feel the hairs stand up on your skin and every instinct in you screams to get out, run far away and not look back. Of course you can't do that so with as much calmness as you can gather within yourself, you reach for the door.
A flash of light you are not expecting blinds you as you stumble out into the hall with all the grace of a toddler learning to walk.
Gathering your wits about you, you look around realizing you are now out in the open instead of in your safe harbor. You weren't expecting that. Why would she?
You can hide it if you act fast, The Party is still in full swing and the halls are fairly populated so you just need to-
Wait, what's this?
Moving back and forth is life and death and a bloody display of neither. Incensed you can only watch as two scum suckers have a... spat with one another, or someone else?
As you watch it plays it all out in live fast forward, the demon on his knees and clutching at his bleeding throat, the other laughing wildly as he put his fist through the first one's chest cracking ribs and shorting out his heart.
Where is your shadow.
A not so suble smell emerges from your pits and your stomach turns as well as the taste of bile in the back of your throat.
Well, this sucks.
The laughing cheat is still gloating to his now dead comrade when his head violently snaps back thrusting his nose through the front of his brain pan with out so much as a whisper. Then...
Theres another smell, sweet yet cloying and filling the halls like a blanket.
The gates of the alligator farm are made out of rubber and the scum swallower knows it. Still breathing through it's throat because the hole in it's brain is making a huge mess, the fiend collapses to the floor as you catch the scent you were hoping for.
You turn to see the shadow standing there quitely with ... an infant in her arms?
Stumbling back against the wall you raise your fists knowing full well your guns are back in your room.
n there with a smirk on their face is the one you're supposed to be following.
You remember who is usually first to work
What is the weather like today?
"The hell do you want and what's that" you ask.
"I?" They laugh cradling the bundle "I'm here to save your worthless hide that's what. Your kind has done such wonders for mine that all I can do is thank you, really. I just need to borrow this little thing for a bit and we will call it all even."
You start to form an angry retort, but they continue before you can get it out.
Looks like you are ten minues late to the start of your shift,
One person you saw in passing was mumbling quitly something about the blood bank, and now you do indeed smell fresh blood in the air.
"Now as for this little thing." they say rocking the bundle in their arms "Just go get that chip out of the storage room I told you about earlier and bring it back here. The code is 1968, then click select all, and hit delete. It'll be a thankless job but hey, waht else is new eh?" They laugh before turning to leave... and the infant.
"they always came back"
you say knowing fully well the next line.
Might as well have it done with.
"Not always." They reply glibly and continue on their way.
Well there you have it, an incurably insane vampire just gave you a baby to take back to the future where no doubt the historians will make a big stink about how you decided to drop him down a well or off a bridge instead. Hey! wait....
Tyrant will not be so happy with you now, even though he keeps telling you to kill the ones you bring back why is it you doubt he will care that you were indirectly following orders.
Honestly though neither was too much effort and brought results so who are you to argue right?
With a sigh and a shrug you regard the squirming bundle in your arms. What to do now, what to do now...
Showing up at the locked gate with a baby would probably not work. Sure you suppose you could wait around for the other vampire to return and assume he'd let you in due to the child... however there is no guarantee when he will be back expecially seeing as he too leaves the confines of this dank hole. Besides you could spend all the time in the world waiting around for him or you could just try to get in now. With an enthusiastic nod to yourself,
the obvious choice is clear.
You noticing the shape of the lock on the gate think back to the lock in your own home, and how easily you opened that one up. Maybe these new fangled locks work the same way? Just gotta find the right... tension or something...
Yes! After several tries re-adjusting the pick it clicks and pops open. Smiling you slide open the gate and make your way passed all of the rubble and buildings inside until you finally come up to a black sedan type vehicle from the 'Modern era'.
Leaving a message for the janitor obviously, you jump in the car and back out of a nearby garage. Your underground parking lot might have been huge, but this vehicle requires a little more precision and space to get used to.
Putting the car on 'auto-pilot' so to speak you begin messing with all the buttons that seem to be common for every one of these fancy modern day vehicles you've ever seen. Finally you decide to just turn the radio on. You are greeted by... Christmas Music??!
The janitor looks like he's having a coronary... The fiddly, slightly out of tune piano music is particularly painful to him for some odd reason...
You dismiss his concerns and continue to listen as you input the time and location you want to go. It's either 2008 or 2017, depending on what time the chip is recording as the year 0/1.
This will be last day at this job so you might as well go all out... You decide on the future, where things can only get better right?
After setting the dials to take you to March 25th, the current year, you hit the large red button.
You are engulfed in a bright light which fades just as suddenly leaving you in the dark... Your stomach turns as you enter a vortex type thing and find yourself whisked away... Through... Time...?
The type of paper you right the note on is interesting. Seems this form of papyrus or whatever is rare these days... But anyway onto the note, you write:
I'm sure by the time you read this Cassandra has told you all about your new slave girl. Before she came, you were the only one here and I was bored out of my mind.
Bye.
P.S. Tell JamesRussel IV that the code for the lock on the safe has been changed to 7690; just in case he sends another spy to check up on me.
One Job Down, Hundreds (Well Tens) to go!
Having to get a new job or maybe sell teeth on street corner in front of some grocery store may not be something you want to do. Surely there must be a better way to make money... a much easier way!
This is crazy, but you've got to admit you're curious. Maybe it's because you're lonely and bored, or maybe it's because you're strange and hopeless, but you have to at least investigate this option! Maybe this is crazy, but it can't possibly be crazier than your situation already is!
Starbucks.
You hearing the first words of the day from the boss is not something you have been longing to hear. Why do you always seem to find work that has a knack of involving way to early mornings?
"Alright Kit, we're going to start cutting back expenses wherever we can. That includes morning coffee. Instead of going to Starbucks every morning, we're going to start brewing the black river sludge they call coffee here in the office."
Why are you getting up early in the monring if you aren't going to treat yourself to a nice breakfast beverage!?
"Black coffee? Are you serious?" The entire team knows how much you love your morning coffee. They are obviously doing this just to spite you! You can't take it anymore, and say exactly that.
"Yes Kit. We're treating ourselves by saving money." Is his response.
And the Award for worst Boss of the Year goes to...
Figuring out the heat of the sunshine and the breeze of the wind, you decide to wait until lunch to make your move. You could probably do it earlier, but if he's as miserable as you from lack of black coffee, you might not even need to fake an assassination attempt in order to get him!
Now that you've decided how to go about this, you're suddenly very hungry. Having decided to do this at the lunch hour makes logical sense, but your stomach doesn't care about things like logic.
You descibing the look over the jobsite from atop your uncomfortable tower of pallets as you eat some crackers you had in your bag. You brought a lot, but they probably won't last you too long... That's if you make it through the rest of the day anyway.
While your master always said that being well prepared is the way to go (Or words to that effect anyway), part of being prepared usually involved carrying a bagful of extra weaponry, smoke bombs and food.
It seems suitable to start on the last wing of the structure. It's the part that will be over the Kohl's Department store, so that means that it will be most important. Whatever you do here is going to be what they see as soon as they walk in the store. If you can get them hooked on this game then all your troubles will have been worth it.
It's still hard for you to believe that you're actually striving for such a human thing, but at this moment you really want their approval.
ck in a 20 by 20 foot room sounds small until you have to carve it out of solid rock. You set up temporary lighting that will last for the next few hours. The plan is to do whatever you can and then come back with reinforcements in a day or two to do it properly. You've done work like this before so you are pretty confident that you know what you're doing, but still best to be wary when operating heavy machinery in such a tight space. The solid stone is split away from the wall by the drills, which then shoot out bits of rubble that are directed into buckets lined with metal wool to prevent any injuries from flying stone chips. Other workers catch the rubble in nets or buckets depending on how far away they are.
You have derigged most of the active lines and removed several large chunks of stone weighing several hundred pounds each when one such slab falls from above you all.
It is tougher than it looks and sounds silly to be wary of something that large when you are in a virtual cavern covered by several more of them. But they weaken over time and this one, while large, wasn't exceptionally so considering how far out it had to be to take the weight. The edge you were carving around had two smaller holes in it from previous days work. Just large enough for a person to completely cover with their hands.
Maybe you are just out of shape, maybe the sound of stone on stone puts you on edge or maybe it was just bad timing, but as the slab clears the top of its hole and drops you instinctively duck. Not much since the bottom of the thing was nearly 2 feet above your head, but it was enough.
You hear a laugh and look up to see who saw that. Surely not many with how far back the other workers are.
Little does he know that the worst is yet to come.
The huge weight smashes into your head from directly above. Your vision goes dark immediately and you fall limply into the hole before the weight on top of you finishes shunting you under the falling rubble.
As this is happening, the man who laughed looks for someone else to share the joke with, since you were obviously not paying attention when it happened.
Fire alarms blaring but you finish laying beams for the solar panel field. You probably should have come in on the weekend to get it all finished, but you're really making good time since you haven't had to drill as many holes for reinforcements. Maybe it would be better to take it a little slower and make sure everything was perfect, but time is money and you figure they would rather have it faster even if meant less perfection.
These rich folk do not know hot it is laying floors for 12 hours today.
The alarm is very loud and very close. You wince at the initial high pitched noise, but you are in the basement where no doubt some sort of explosion took place. The floor above you holds all the dangerous equipment so there is no need to rush. At least that is what you think at first.
The stairwell door opens just as the lights go out and white smoke begins filling the room from somewhere out of site at the top of the stairs.
Champion asking "pound for pound which one is stronger, bull or a gator."
You aren't sure if he is talking to you or himself, doesn't really matter he is not getting an answer. He should know the answer anyway, Gators only weigh about half as much but have brutal teeth and jaws and will fight to the death all the way up until you whack them senseless with a bat, get bitten nearly in half and die or choke it to death by wrapping your arms and legs around it while riding it and squeezing.
You tell him with all due respect, and with the utmost respect that you really need to get back to work while staying well away from him for your own safety..
He laughs again "Respect, you should show fear not respect to someone who could tear you apart."
Bull just grins.
Seriously worried now you head back into the unfinishedfortunately unfogged basement.
You have done this many times before but all the things that were in your head simply are not there now. Your specific plan on how to do the bottom 2 floors is gone. You are partially baffled as you rely heavily on a mental image while laying, you can not even picture an ending. This is very bad and Champion knows it. He has robbed you of your best trick, knowing inside and out exactly how to go about finishing this project and running through your head over and over again until you get it perfect.
But if you had to choose one to get in the ring with one of these guys it would be Bull. At least you know exactly what he would do and how he fights by his build alone.
You stand there in the now hazy basement looking up at the damage from what you think was a backfire from a generator you planned to fix tomorrow when a realization hits.
Bull approaches and puts his face right up to yours, but you no longer flinch "Turn off the alarm." You tell him with confidence.
"Make me."
Rounding up gators across tile floor of the barn and the first 3/4 of the tunnel was easily done. The last 1/4 you spent dodging teeth after they turned on you.
Your inner elbows may have a few new holes but you managed to escape death.
"So much for curing them." You blurt out in genuine surprise and frustration.
"What?" asks blondie seeming confused, "The gators were infected?
Champion seemed just as confused as blondie, "Uhh...
Tyrant smells of cheap cigars and hard liquor. His bald head gleaming in the slightly brighter basement lights, the hairy mole rat nest on his left cheek squirming across his haggard face for a better view of all the fresh meat in front of him, "So youz think yer smart huh? I'll give ya a sample 'a just how smart ya aren't." he says with a slight slur and even more malicious intent.
A butcher knife left on a table in the swamp room and judging by the dried blood on it he means to use it on you or one of the others.
Once again though you have no idea where you are. So utilizing the best thing in your favor right now, your speed you...
A lot happened here, too much to go into details but including the second brain cell you used just before this moment you were able to think clearly enough to realize something was off about this situation.
Looks tempting 12 inches of steel just begging to taste flesh but think.
First thing I've heard him say that isn't a verbal beating is what he said about gators and how they turned.
Probably means the virus spread to the fauna and flora here. Granted gators don't damage easily a regular virus wouldn't kill them either. Some of them would become carriers at best but the way he said it.... Something worse....
Eating pepperoni pizza while watching tv on your day off from working is one thing but digesting it and watching your figure is a whole other.
Two containments, one an expert in microbiology and the other with a degree in genetics both hold master keys to potentially opening doors the world has never seen.
You are no slouch yourself having been published at 18 and graduating with honors. What are you going to do to top their accomplishments when they still had two duels ahead of them?
Something grand... something no one has even dared try since the dark ages.
Tyrant responding "i am not paying you for april fools"
Jokes on him because this is going to be priceless. Though you better come up with a good plan.
Tyrant looks as if he does not believe what just transpired between the two of you just now. Almost as if he really doesn't think you'll do it. Well you will show him and with your triple threat plan there is no way it can fail. It's going to take some time to set up and longer to reach the climax but that's why you start working on it today.
While setting up your plan you also need to keep up on the regular missions assigned by tyrant in addition to your normal studying.
He will not forget being robbed of his victory over you and next time he will not let it slip by. Unfortunately, this line of thinking brings on more stress. In everything you do you must be perfect, because one mistake could lead to someone's death and you cannot risk that. So as not to worry mom you tell her you're still going to class and work but really you are coming here three, sometimes four nights a week after everyone has gone off to bed.
You stopped him from taking the pizza cutter from the store and now every once in a while he threatens to stop by during your practice sessions. You don't mind though because you're starting to deal with the visions better. With your triple threat plan in place you aren't nearly as stressed anymore, well at least until one week before tyrant makes his anticipated appearance.
Three days and three sleepless nights did not do wonders for your mental state and in this moment you don't know if you are going to be able to go through with it or not.
Now you will pay by being fired because of your tardiness but that's the least of your worries. You did everything you could to prepare and even bought electronics with some of your pay to bribe the supply guy. One way or another this is going to happen.
As you're going through your routine today you start thinking maybe you should quit while you're ahead but then you think about what kind of life that would be.
Sneaking in before day shift arrives doesn't help much since as soon as you enter the elevator several others get in with you. It's worse on the bus ride over where at one time you had to stand due to capacity. You try to listen to music but there is no way to block everything out.
A day later you are taken off pizzas and given a position on the chicken ward where the pace is slower and you aren't as stressed out all the time.
The sights and sounds of tube lights and buzzing pole saws fill the airwaves
You are champion an all american alligator delivery agent
Making certain your guile and intelligence overcomes the brutish mutants, you go into your day.
You lay low for a while studying the habits of the various creatures. From what you can tell they split up into small groups of 3-5 and patrol the cave systems. When one group gets too far from the rest they link up with another nearby one to mix up the pathing.
Working for an alligator farm that is slowly going out of business you hear rumors of a secret lab hidden deep underground and start doing volunteer work for extra money. With this in mind and months of patient scouting you set your plan in to motion...
The first part of the plan is to get inside without raising any alarms. The first group of heavily armed mercs is easy enough to evade since they are busy getting drunk in the wild life safari building.
The second group however is a mobile patrol that is actively on the look out.
Hunting down a monster in the swamps of the okeenokee is dangerous in and of itself but you need the cover and the waterleaves help break up your outlines. When one lays down to sleep you creep from rock to rock, vine to vine until you are close enough to kill them with your knife.
The others on patrol soon freak out and run around screaming for reinforcements so you change your plan from covert assassination to dramatic escape!
A desperate man who is going to fail at everything he starts, but for that brief shining moment he is a true champion
Will succeed because of it and continue his life as a hero
You are champion an unparalleled master of subterfuge and escape
Hardships have been faced, and hardships will continue to be faced. It doesn't matter though, you now that you have what it takes to overcome adversity. Sure, years of diligent practice have helped your case but it is your indomitable human spirit that has gotten you this far and will continue too. You finally get to sleep at this point and dream of the far away places you will travel too.
Working for an alligator farm that is slowly going out of business, you realize only 1 guard remains at the front gate. The inner fences have activated sensors so getting through them is no good. Remembering the rotten potato you shoved in your boot yesterday you realize it is the perfect tool for the job.
You sneak up and just as he is turning away you throw the rotten spud against the back of his head. He falls forward and knocking himself out. You slip past and make it to the lab door which is fortunately not locked.
It was a good job of scouting the area that allowed you to avoid any hostile mutants or groups on your journey too the lab. Wanting to keep up the habit you bring out your old maps to see where you should go next.
Once more nature has foiled your plans and your maps have gotten wet during the journey here making them near useless. You wipe off as much water as you can and try to orient yourself.
Checking the date to figure out what is to be done today you instead find that the entry has been scrubbed clean leaving you unsure if this was done on purpose or not.
Watching the time to see if you have awoken ahead of schedule or behind you see that you have got the time right. This makes no sense and out of ideas you head to the door to check the status there.
Something is hastily scribbled onto the sign and it takes you a while to work out what it says:
Looking back at today's date you realize that thought Holding container shutting down in 3...2...1...
Early enough to prevent you being trapped in the past, but late enough that if something had gone wrong for you erasing the writing would leave you none the wiser.
You have escaped from the maze!
Today is a day of clutch collectiong and you grab it all
You grab a nearby mop and bucket and go to work
and your previous ruthless murdering ways pay off when you notice a hidden door
It is too small for the guards to get through but you think you can manage if you squeeze
Will succeed because of it and continue his life as a hero
You are a ruthless killing machine who shows no mercy to his enemies. That being said you treat all people like they are nothing. You need the extra room to live so squeezing into the pipe is not an option for you. Still, you run at the door as hard as you can...
Where is your shadow. You realize you haven't seen him this entire time. It is honestly a little concerning. You hope he didn't do anything stupid like try to stop the riot himself. Maybe you should have ensured that he got out of there safely...
Regardless, you feel it go and land a solid kick to the door which breaks the locking mechanism and send it wide open. Small victory for the cult!
A blast of shampoo to clean yourself off from the blood and any other stains you have got on you from the work you have just done as go back to your private room. Your mind is racing at this point wondering what the hell is going on. You are not the religious type but you do remember a verse from one of these old books that was forced upon you as a child. It felt weird at the time that they were all accepting of your close minded ways but it's good right now.
The arm of the tyrant had been taken by the jaws of the alligator. HIS NAME IS A PUN! Now that that is done, his story is finished and now it is yours to change.
Champion lost himself in heat and suds but you've still got places to be so get back to business.
Laughing at the attempted insult you gear up to get back on the road and finish off this stray thought once and for all.
A not so suble smell emerges from your pits and you quickly find a new shirt. It's amazing what a bit of butchery can do to you. You briefly thank your sun and moon gods that it wasn't both at the same time or you would have had real trouble. Now then where was that, yes that's the one...
That's when you feel something drop onto your shoulder.
You can pay a dollar for the cheapest stuff or splurge for three and a half on the good stuff.
The miltary is still swarming over the city streets but as long as you aren't committing mass genocide or looting everything in sight they have bigger problems to attend to and will leave you alone. This is an advantage since you do not wish to be recognized by any of your fellow doppelgangers if at all possible.
The boss will think you have soft head but it will make the roads safer.
You never carried any of your ill-begotten loot with you so you had better keep a low profile for a little longer.
You vaugely remember talk of some sort of government job listing at the post office that you originally tried to apply for the hero job at. Since you can read and write you figure they could help you dig a little deeper into this conspiracy.
After getting directions from a friendly neighborhood bum since you still aren't exactly sure where anything is in this town yet you set off.
A guard watches your every move from the entrance as they are for everyone at this point probably to make sure you don't steal anything.
What is the point of leaving the house if alcohol is cheap and readily available at corner stores anyway?
There are more than a few jobs you could put your time to but post offices seemed like one of the easiest. Even your pitiful charisma of 2 should be able to get you work there and they need all the employees they can get thanks to crooked computers and overworked staff.
You wander the halls looking for the right department while trying your best not to look threatening...Or shady, piece of cake.
Armored men with guns crowding around while muttering things into walkie-talkies is a familiar sight to you given your recent travels around the city and for once it isn't directed at you so you enjoy the spectacle for a moment before making your way to the desk.
From behind the tall wooden barrier Belinda inspects you with a look of disinterest on her face. Your kind have always looked down on them as nothing more than glorified mail deliverers but today she will be doing just that...
Slowly passing of the time by watching others at work was really getting to her.
"What?!" Her voice sounds a lot like yours probably does your head hurts just hearing it.
"I said what do you want?! I'm busy!!"
Clattering of keys turns to thumping as she violently stabs them in anger.
Bye.
Quickly muffled with a wooshing sound as the door closes behind you. Oh right you didn't tell her what you wanted yet,
Well looks like it's off to plan B then,
Wandering the halls again seems fruitless but for whatever reason a small broom closet catches your eye.
Looking around first to see if anyone is watching you quickly open it up and climb inside. The halls were fairly empty so this should be a safe spot to wait until sunset when they close down for the night.
It is tougher than it looks and sounds silly
What kind of shampoo is it that has a "otomy" at the end anyway? Why in the world do they make this stuff so complicated? You never cared what you washed your hair with before and the old brand was fine for you!
You shake your head to get the bubbles out of your ears. You haven't got all day you know, at this rate you might not make it to work on time...You almost chuckle at the irony and how your boss would react IF you turned up at all.
Passing of time quickly now.
While enjoying your trashy romance novel you realize you can no longer hear the bustle of the city. From the visits to the blood banks and nightly walks about, you know that it is within a few hours of sunrise, generally everyone and their mother is asleep by now.
Thinking back on what has happened today so far you realize you haven't eaten much and are feeling rather hungry.
ctims and general creepiness of some of the female visitors you know you could sneak into the kitchens and help yourself without raising any alarms. Actually, that's not a bad idea. Packing a few supplies from there wouldn't be suspicious at all and you're pretty sure the head chef wouldn't miss a few cuts here and there, he or she has never stashed any food in their desk when you've been 'working' late before...
"Right then,"
Your replacement is doing fine and you should have made it in time for your own as well. You know now that you will have to do something about him. You need more time to yourself,
It takes a hour of sneaking around back ways of the manor to get to the kitchens but once inside you realize just how hungry you've been and begin pulling out everything that looks remotely as food and stacking it into a small pile on the counter.
You tell him with all due respect, that you don't think your replacement will work out and for him to take his time before finding a new one.
"It's happened before and it will happen again so don't stress yourself over it, I'll be back in my office tomorrow."
The voice on the other end of the line is silent for a few seconds as he tries to formulate an argument, then simply replies with
"Alright. It's your funeral."
You smile to yourself, you might get lucky yet.
Working for an alligator farm that is slowly going out of business was never your dream but at least you'll get to enjoy your free time and hopefully that time will be a lot longer than originally expected.
Seeking death in a rough industry is tempting but you know that when the time comes, it will come and there is nothing you can do to stop it, but waiting for it is just plain silly.
It paid well, gave you food on the table and a roof over your head but - like everything else - you realize that it simply was not for you and leaving it is surprisingly easy.
"Well, I'm off to see the world," You announce as you stand in the kitchen loading up a bag with food for your next few days out.
Your mother sighs,
"You don't want to stay and help your brothers with the farm..." It's not really a question.
You are the only person there with a smirk on their face.
"Nope, not my thing," You call back waving, "I'll see you all sometime."
The door closing behind you cuts off any potential response.
Listening to the tyrant tell you the story of the alligator attack is almost exactly how you remember it, the only major difference is that you both exit the STORY proper at a different time.
You've left the house within seconds of hanging up the phone, which due to your rush you end up chewing through the conversation without realizing where you were getting to,
"So he sent him to hospital..." You finish up as your walking partner ends his tale with the customary finger pointing.
use this chance to ask questions about other areas and if you remember anything about them, and do your best to use the information as best you can while not getting distracted from the important aspects of staying alive in your walk to safety...
Moving in out of the slower with maximum speed the two of you make great progress, besides your own skill at avoiding the dead and the zed the number of patches that appear to be unrelated to either side is high, for whatever reason you're passing a number of small communities that have set up safe areas, none of which seem to be attempting contact with one another or opening their gates to strangers.
They even deliver here at times.
Supplying a community with two people in it, let along one of any size must be difficult at best, impossible at worst but the two of you hardly make a dent in the stores they have set aside, even if they are only drinking the weak stuff.
You give your knowledge on dealing with alligators after hearing one of the tales from "Gators" himself.
ght stands out as interesting, it is kinda cool that you managed to at least supply your new friends with a distraction from giant lizard nightmares.
Never get it, some people are unnerved by worms and slimy things but a reptile nearly twice the size of an average car having you for breakfast came straight out its mouth and chasing you on land was the least of your worries, who knows though, you were pretty shaken up at the time.
You make plans with your new companions to go their way for now but will stay in contact and eventually head to meet up with them when both parties are ready.
These rich folk do not know hot it is laying floors for 12 hours today.
thinks one of the workers to another as you walk back through Heaton, You arrive back at "The usual spot" with enough time that brings your walk home well into the next day but you know full well once this batch is set you are going to have a few slower days so no point in rushing.
Tyrant smells of cheap cigars and hard liquor when you return and goes on about some bandits he "accidently" ran into in a secluded area for so long that any normal person would assume it was a heated battle, but you know that it's just his excuse for another game of poker.
The next few days are indeed slower as Tyrant predicted, being confined mainly to The sewers leading into the facility and only leaving them to go grab food.
Arrive to work at the alligator farm on time and attempt to be social with the workers, who give off a similar mindset to the scum you have been living among for months now so it makes things easy.
You've been taking the drops for a while so hopefully the time is nearly right, you try asking the boss if he has known cases of theft recently but he says that due to how low tech their security is they rarely ever have people attempting it, still you chalk it up as a possibility and keep an ear out.
You pasted on the way to work yesterday so can't really do it again today as you would be arriving late so instead you wait until lunchtime when the workers take their deliveries and head out to meet Blinky and Kyle where they wait across the road, "Kyle This is Blinky. I mentioned him to you yesterday." You essentially say as you wave to the very nervous man across the road, not surprising after all he has heard.
Rounding up gators across tile floor of the barn and hand feeding them until it's time to leave, you know tonight is the night.
You head home and say your usual goodbye to tyrant as you leave but as soon as you turn your back he gets a nasty grin on his face and makes a hunch that you won't be returning.
The Facility seems lit brighter than usual as you approach and can hear noise coming from it further confirming your earlier suspicion that they were rushing to get the job finished.
g a message for the janitor after arriving "I may be a while, opening a gastro pub down in the vaults, should keep everyone happy while the boss does some overtime." You add as your excuse should you be questioned.
Its really not that hard sneaking around in the facility as the guards are all indoors drinking and looking out for any vandalism to the stills rather than patrolling as would make sense.
This will be last day at this job and you have yet to access the secured area, Kyle said he had Tinker get him some blueprints of the place and saw a reference to lab 5 so if all goes to plan you might just get inside there tonight.
You run through what food you has on you that would be good to stuff in your sack for a snack while getting around the place.
Even insomnia all the time but i can't stop the yawning.
A bunch of left overs from yesterday makes up your loot sack which is slung over one Shoulder as you keep on the move, checking every so often that the cherry tonic bottle is still in place.
Keeping to the shadows you make your way over Blinky and Kyle who wave you over, "Check it, they got it ready to go."
You place yourself in a relaxed state of mind and after taking a moment to make sure you are Not being watched, you Heave your sack onto the Shuttle Glen and twist the cork off the bottle.
You take a long slow breath in through your nostrils as you watch the liquid rise up the glass, almost 98% alcohol so it should burn good and proper.
Looks tempting 12 inches of steel just begging to taste flesh and slide in between organs.
A couple more guards wander out as you watch the rising liquid finally passing the bottle mouth and on to your hand, quickly you give the cork a twist and drop it in before scanning all around for cameras or security.
You cant be caught now.
Having to get a new job or maybe sell teeth on street corner in front of that Chinese restraunt.
The tyrant would be there screaming and shouting for photo op.
None in sight but that doesn't mean they are not around so you quickly head across the shuttle terrain and into the shadows of the still under construction buildings opposite, Yes Kyle was right they never secured this side at all.
who is floating 6 inches above the ground down there?
Not wasting time you make your way down as fast as you dare and set out to find lab 5 reference on the plans.
You pay no mind to the wrongly placed cannon that you pass or the odd looking machine gun, time is of the essence and you hear the alarm go off up at the facility so know you are on a clock now.
You double check the plan as you move and try one door that is locked, tearing the door off its hinges just to make sure but finding only a room full slugs and specimans, unused by your purposes you close it again.
 can crush bone but risks making too much noise
You pause to collect yourself and listen for rise or fall in the noise from above, there doesn't seem to be any and the door to lab 5 is trivial to find now that you are looking for it.
right, let's get this done.
You heft the wrench into the air and turn to bring it down on the padlock when you feel a tingle run down your spine and pause.
Did anyone else hear that?
Fire alarms blaring but you finish laying beams for the solar panel field above your town then half destroy someones door before you announce the use for it.
It was right on top of you, crunching into the padlock and beyond with blood and flesh erupting everywhere, too late to scream, why did you hesitate?!
The gates of the alligator farm are made out of old shipping containers, held together with welds and strong as anything. Even if someone else had heard it, they would have never made out what it was or where it came from
but you know now that you heard it, the sound of a fresh kill being dragged off to be eaten somewhere safe.
You are an all american alligator delivery agent and just made first blood.
Working for an alligator farm that is slowly going out of business, you've heard all the jokes before.
Currently in your last week as an employee there is no way that news of your strange disappearances from work wouldn't leak to the wrong ears, you quit right after the acid in the waterhole story and they still talked about it months later.
some people just don't know when to stop.
Right now you're waiting till nightfall, hiding out in one of the shacks on stilts that dot this side of the 'farm'.
A flash of light you are certain was a camera going off, signals that the alligator man has completed his errand or whatever mission it was he had, and has retreated back to the subway.
You wait till nightfall properly then head for your truck.
Just down the road is the turn off to Shreveport and a 24 hour dropbox, you have provided them with an updated cell phone picture of yourself, hopefully things have changed enough that this time it will actually be you that gets picked up.
For now laying down sheetrock in a 20 by 20 foot room sounds an awful lot better than hunting alligators and you can let the pros worry about things from here.
You did it!
Dealing with unexploded cluster bombs in Cambodia and escaping strange vampire kidnappers in Transylvania were the easy parts of this job, the killings in Africa and America were necessary but the alligator farm was where it finally ended for you regardless of results.
Eyewitness reports, two drops of blood in a vast ocean of red on a concrete floor, maximum evasive action and still finding a half chewed torso.
quarter chewed if you take into account that only 3 limbs were found.
You are champion!
There is a feel to do it all over again but there are smarter folks than you with enough money to pay for constant training and no scruples or sense of right and wrong so they keep doing it or just find themselves replaced by a new batch of hungry immigrants.
Your pendant their guarantee of safety you suppose.
job done, your free now, fly little ant.
Early enough in the morning to have the streets to yourself, you find an all night laundromat and decide to pass some time while your clothing loads in the machines.
You clean your extra pair of boots, they were so full of sand and grit that you didn't even know you had nails in them till they were cleaned out. Staring at your splayed toes and peeling skin you realize just how long your feet have taken a pounding recently.
Mirror is steamed while you lather up with soap and a stiff brush, two minutes is enough.
It's been a long week and you fall asleep watching the clothes spin dry, waking to find everything dry and freshly laundered.
There is no reason to rush now but you can feel itchy feet already starting to get under your skin.
Cussing and hitting you foot on the curb of the sidewalk you head North beside the line of railcars, content enough to head back to the cabin.
It must be Spring again, the grass is green and the rains have come. The sun overhead is hotter than a blanket and within an hour your sweat soaked shirt is clinging to your back, neck and underarms. you peel it off and fold it into a bag to carry over your shoulder.
You wish the blood to be colored red, not that shades of purple and blue. It does make the bramble scratches stand out though along your bare legs and arms. You wished you had remembered to put some repellant on.
Deciding to shower and go to work with clean undamaged skin was not a practical decision but you're to prideful to go back and apply more repellant now.
You set up camp a few hours into the foothills thinking that maybe you could induce hunger by exercise but your stomach just grumbles and thoughts of food bring only dissatisfaction.
The biggest sin of the shadow of the champion included
This morning you found a new energy and with it some determination to persevere. Even though you are being slowly eaten from within, you can make the most of what time you have left.
There is no need to exert yourself excessively and there is much to learn from books so you settle into a routine of reading and short hunting trips to satisfy your hunger. Months pass in something resembling contentment.
Maybe you are just out of shape, you thought you'd be dead by now but you seem to have misplaced your early enthusiasm for suicide. If anything you feel just a little stronger and your senses are razor sharp now.
You've explored all the local caves and searched out all the easy to reach places for food, You'll have to head further afield soon but there is no great rush as it is easy to hunt human when they are confined to herds and tend to travel in large numbers making them rather dumb.
Then standing around won't get you there any faster so you set off to scout a good route from the city. The quickest route will take you through or close to bandit territory so it probably isn't one you should take but distances are distorted out here so it might only be 30 miles away rather than the 60 it seems.
The first few days you stick to valleys as much as possible and haven't seen another living soul since you passed a dullahan rider going the other way two days ago.
Hunting down a monster in the swamps of the okeenokee is one thing but out here where theres an endless supply of food with no risk of a painful death by snakebite it seems like a waste of your time.
You could head back south east towards the Did lobe and eat people out of house and home for years before having to move on but you cant see what advantage it would give you over just staying in the city and eating untouchables. On the other hand there are very few idiots wandering around in the wilderness.
 are you getting up early in the monring to set traps and sneaking up on every sound or do you force yourself to endure the hunger for the thrill of the hunt?

]
Attack!
You set off early in the morning,sacquite bladder full and bellys nearly as full of meat strips (raw. Who knows what species it came from.) These people have charciarbs but no reason so you set out with determination and a sharp rock. remember that route finding is important so you make a few marker stones.
It was a good job you paotanced as you cross into bandit terriotry soon after and come across a small patrol of 3 men. They don't expect attack from anyone with half a brain so you take the first out immediatley by jumping on him from behind and staing his throat. the other 2 only escape destryolition by ignoring you and fleeing for their lives.
You never are sick and you don't like lying down to sleep so as soon as its dusk you keep moving.
The next batch of travellers are vulchers and you know from bitter experience they are constantly teleporting around the area and they fling poison quills at anything that moves (And a lot that don't) You are going to have to be cautious.
These ones are smart however and one sees you early on and calls for back up.
There is some chit chat at the desk before you see the rest of the crew. there are 6 of them altogether and you wait patiently for nightfall before finding a new roost.
You wake very very early the next morning but the vulchers have already gone again, You swear at them for their suden movements but as you ready to leave the roost you see a woman waiting in the trees for you "They are not so smart after all"
Tyrant responding "i am not paying you for april fools"
Checking the date to figure out what is to be done today, You find its actually the 14th so it cant be a sent from tyrant.
You scream something indecipherable and rage for a bit but eventually calm down enough to think "they fell asleep on nightwatch or something" You think you know who it as well, Galik is the main suspect as he was trying to get out of nightwatch the most.
Little does he know but hes about to feel your wrath!
Pulling on some foot wrappings and arming yourself with a rockhard stick you sneak out of the house and make your way to the camp.
They have 3 watchmen on duty. 1 on the road and 1 either side in the trees and their fires are very close to the branches so if you were paying attention they were already give their positions away.
Checking the time to see if you have awoken early enough you slink towards the closest guard on the road and just as you are about to reach out and tap him he notices you. He feints left but you predict that and swipe your stick right smashing into the back of his head. You keep moving and ducking around the branches to the next guard on that side who has now noticed something is wrong.
Gators bite with powerful jaws and wrestle a bit different than bulls but you manage to slip under his defenses and thwack! right across the back of his head making him grunt with pain then fall silent forever. the one on the right is taking notice and raising an alarm among his fellows but you are upon him like a hawk among pigeons. A quick lash from the stick makes him surronde your legs and you knock him out with 2 quick swipes as he is dazed and trying to stand up.
Looks like you are ten minues late to the start of your shift, well at least you finished all your senterrieving for the day.
You hope they appreciate how you sometimes need to get your reps in and a quick ways to do it. you are no hunter gatherer so the easy option through the trees was within option.
"HEY GUYS SLEEPING BEAUTY WOKE UP!"
There would be a knock a the door from Farhan before you had the chance to get back and he comes trotting over squeeling something in that heavy accent of his
"The great unloving Lord has brought you out of your slumber! But you must have enjoyed yourself with all those berry's around your mouth, even the inside!"
You simply let him run off at the mouth while you walk away thinking about the unconscious guards and grinning to yourself "perhaps I should become a hunter gatherer more often....."
A desperate man who is going to fail at everything he starts, but tries so hard that people can't bring themselves to hate him. He's a drunk but hasn't had a drink in over a month, he's a thief but gives away everything he steals, he's ugly but innumerable women claim he is their lover, he's a failure but the king gives him high honors, what's going on with Farhan?
"they always came back" "they always came back" "they always came back"
Its the same 4 words over and over again but this time you are yelling them at Farhan. After Farhan arrived you ignored him like you do with everyone else and got on with your work but he followed and started jabbering away to you.
Time moves so slow and you are forgeting where you have been and what you have done, people don't like you saying things your old friends said but it was so long ago that they are starting to sound similar.
Then in his flurry of words he mentions a place that you know! He said this city, where you are now at was once ruled under another name hundreds of years ago and the Old man had brought it up many times over dinner, even on his death bed.
The inevitable casualty that happens to men of your age in horrible ways had hit him. You are now the last man standing of your group. This small fact attracts Farhan over to you after yelling.
Farhan knows the pain and can relate "I lost many friends in my time too, it must be fate that has us both here at the end, we must unite to fight against fate together!" Is what he says to you repeatedly while hugging you.
Perhaps there is another option out there for someone like you? "we could run away and forget our names" You had once suggested while drunk but they wouldn't hear of it "we would only be playing into the hands of fate" One of them had said, accepting your role was the main path.
You look upon Farhan with fresh eyes for the first time since he had arrived, he had insisted on staying longer than everyone else did while also changing his mind constantly about leaving.
You hearing the first words of the day from the boss "Farhan is getting on everyone's nerve with indecisiveness. So I'm sending him to the mines"
You look into his pleading eyes and say "i don't care anymore... you can have me."
After all who are you anymore.
Watching the time to see if you have awoken a minute early, you creep up to the bedside of your nearest target.
The 3rd wife of the lord, a beautiful but cruel women who revels in the misery of others and whose imagination for torments is only matched by her lust for power... you will have to move quickly. Ripping the covers off her you discover she is not in the bed.
I wonder why i do this? It cannot be for power, or riches. Maybe its just all the misery they have caused so gleefully that they deserve this horrible death.
Laying down in her sleeper you silently laugh to yourself as you remember her torment of others, she is definitely one of the worst ones. You are about to chuck a rag doused in ether spirits when suddenly she leaps into the bed with her face only a few inches away from yours.
Washing the blood and grime off of you in the bath you cannot believe your luck. You are alive! She did not sense anything!
As you exit the bath a murderous scowl is cast upon your face as power and impunity flood through your veins. Farhan must die. He was not experienced enough to take advantage of your most unlikley escape from the perfidious 3rd wife. Besides, she was cruel, what have you got against her?
Almost nothing other than her beauty speeches are just that.
You point your blood stump finger at him and he falls squirming to the ground, but with the poison, he should be dead soon unlike the 3rd wife you almost killed by using an overdose.
His cries keep the guards busy for a while but they soon dispose of his body and no-one else sees it happen.
Wondering if you should apply or what "good" faction due to how close this all was you decided to wait and see what Farhan did before your next big decision point which would be at most a week away.
You know he would be at least nice to you for saving his life. hanged for attempted murderess!
When the day arrived however you still hadn't quite made up your mind so you decide to watch how everyone else acts.
You brawling with a monster and losing, turns out to be good for you because you avoided the scarred svelk executioner in the winding path that was your horrible week as a miner.
Now a blood stump at the the red hot rage you feel you look about you... what to do, what to do...
The Old man has taken a shine to you for some strange reason and seems quite happy in your company. Also if you killed him then who would clarify all the events for you so you could make an informed decision
Farhan and the beloved wife are both keen on you it would seem, she especially. She seems like the sort who would bear your children and coddle them while they grew strong.
But if you had to choose one to get in the ring with one of those scum ECS thugs, which would it be?
Goliath hides his feelings well. He is a true void man but you get the impression if he hated you he would let you know. A lack of visible emotion doesn't mean he likes you though.
Melcar goes on and on about how proud he is of you and that you are a real asset to him... but an accursed never rewarded in this world does not bode well for your kind.
You sell the american alligator egg and meat raised in the company lab section. Apparently it makes for a very interesting taste and can fetch a high price but nobody had bother to raise them before so hunting down the eggs and hatching them took forever!
You had to crack a few of their shells before they stopped122 years old nowYear 187
Orvyn Tactitus
That's what your new associate is called, an informant for hire and apparently he works for everyone but sides with no one.
Like working with vicious animals or playing with sharp objects in the dark, it is a risky endeavour that could end your life if you are not careful or quick enough. But it also very profitable if you manage to avoid the many traps your competitors have set for said vicious animal.
You are so close to gaining control of the Elios family territory and quite frankly neither of you really want to share it, but there is just too much blood on the hands of both of you.
Lizards with venom that can make you wish for death but not achieve it, vicious mutant giant bugs that seemed to be impervious to pain (or any sense of danger) and finally a couple of "lost" Forge rangers.116 years old nowYear 198
It could be worse and you certainly have had worse but the war with Elios was one of attrition. You knew he wasn't going to go down without making you pay in blood first and that's what he did.
The sunshines over the cow pasture in front of his mansion. It's just grass, a couple of horses and a sand pit but it makes you feel comfortable.
Slavery is always good for some extra cash, drug trafficking and prostitution rackets are no different. It's just too bad that slavery in it's more common forms is quite banned these days and still covered over by layers of law and regulation. Most "citizens" don't even think they are being slaves if they are using health risks illegal drugs or whores.
The favorite food of the champion includes prime rib, steak, pork chops or anything else from the beef family and he is currently picking his teeth. Your man Jorn isn't with you anymore, he died from disease some years ago. He was a strong man and an excellent bodyguard but prone to enjoying dabbling with chems and mutagenic drugs. You never understood that yourself; enjoying putting foreign substances into your body.
A loud bang that is so familiar by now is heard from across the mansion. The champion walks out on his balcony squinting his eyes against the sun and you soon he see a man fall down from the top of one of the wind turbines. He lets out a sigh and shakes his head before going back inside for a cleanup.
He will not forget being robbed again. And you needn't worry about such things either. Now that you have the entire west coast territory pretty much locked down, you can focus on other matters in a more direct manner.
Heading east seems like the plan now and not only for Slavelords, you've lived long enough in the wasteland and want to conquer virgin territory as it were.
You noticing the type of clothing on what is left of the arm printing machines for one thing. Seems like tanned human leather is all the rage lately and used for more than gun holsters and motor oil bottles. Shirts,pants, dresses and lingerie as well. And all of it coming from the east.
It is known that there is a nation to the east, the "neo-citizens"
Gays are happy you are gone and have combined the city-states of Aden into one single nation with very heavy handed laws.
On top of having their own national guard they even have their own secret police (secret because they infiltrate every aspect of society) And they call you a menace to civilized society.
The funny thing is, you have moved on from being a scourge on humanity to filling the same roll a Sauron did in his day.
Your door broken down and the election Asia said she remembered was coming soon and you assumed you were going to have to defend your turf.
But this? This wasn't on your radar.
Setting up your own video network, designing your own 3d glasses and trying to beam direct signals to people's semisentient personal devices so they could watch the election debates live. It seems like a lot of trouble just for an election.
You noticing the shape of the lock on the gate
You are champion an all american alligator delivery agent!
After burrying the two guards dug up from the local cemetery, you continue on down the road.
And that is when you spot a figure approaching your way. Probably a trader of some sort; they tend to travel in caravans for protection since bandits are common on these roads. The funny thing is, he is coming from the city and not towards it.
You get closer and realize this ain't no trader, this is a wanderer.
Didn't return to MN, must be a pseudonym then
We make our home in glorified catacombs underneath a hospital.
Catacombs...? This just gets better and better. All these wandering mnds from wandering Tel across the continent and winding up here; it is a good thing one of them has started keeping notes, otherwise nobody would believe any of this.
Probably another guard, since you put guards at every important door.
Kidnap victims and brainwashed cultists, each expendable in furtherance of our great and mysterious plan...
Great. Now you've got an entire marching band playing inside your head. This can't be healthy.
You descibing the look over the jobsite when you first arrived
Chapter 2C: The Tel Sutton Siblings (A Family Band)
We return to the story exactly where we left off.
From the looks of things, he was beaten up pretty bad by someone...or something. Last time someone got the best of you like this it was the gas cloud out near Industry and that didn't turn out too well for our side. Whoever did this to Swifty might be around too so you are going to be cautious about this.
Bubba went out jogging one day not too long ago and hasn't returned, you hope he isn't the one you're stepping over here.
"Swifty?" you call out quietly. You aren't sure he is alive but might as well make sure if you are going to move him.
"Yeah..." a very weak voice answers back. You find him lying in a pile of trash next to a broken down freak show wagon.
You work on a an alligator far in a swamp just outside of town and there ain't no alligators in New York City...so who puts on hicks for...
Swifty is a bloody mess. He was beaten to a pulp and then some. Amidst the bleeding cuts you see an unnatural twist of flesh where his left eye should be. What horror or foul plans did his eye see before they took it? You can't imagine the pain he is feeling, but right now you need to focus on getting out of here alive.
A butcher knife left on a table in the swamp room
Champion asking "pound for pound which one is stronger, bull or a gator." It was settled when the bull pushed over the gator and won the title of "King of the Swamp" while eating...
Severed human ear on a platinum chain, an apparent gift from your bride to you on your wedding night. After all, true love means never having to say you're sorry...right?
On second thought, get back in the game. It's time to stop reminiscing about old times and start concentrating on surviving the fix you are in right now!
The finger that used to point at you is no longer attached and is instead currently blocking a shot to the chest. Whether you have an extra second or not really won't make that much of a difference in the scheme of things since you doubt if they missed at such close range. But, if you're trying to be stealthy then every little bit helps and so you try to dive behind some boxes just before several gunshots bring the inventory records you were looking at a year ago ...to an end.
Clawhammer beats to play but you ain't quite fast enough...
The Gheight overpowers all its foes with massive blows from one of the largest weapons seen on the battlefield, easily fitting into the category of oversized two-handed swords. Utilizing an initial downward strike to assist in catching a foe off balance and bring them to their knees, the follow through is ruthless...
You had some success last year interrogating an art student that was caught painting a rival gang's graffiti on a warehouse wall.
The thoughts you own flow like bubbles down the pipe and pop before they are seen...
"Well, ain't you a couple of dumb little shits," Mallot scoffs as the last reverberation of his previous statement is felt. Claw and Fang fit the part well with their snarls and snorts, but you at least thought you would be allowed to speak before being cut down like wheat.
"miserable...life" is all you utter as a last testament of your thoughts before the inevetible:
You can't believe they killed you over something as petty as a stencil on a wall! They will never get away with it, but at least you took one of them with you. That's what they'll read when they see you lying here with Clawhammer drowning in his own blood. Let them figure that bit out. You lean back and let death embrace you like an old lover.
Horny gay men are open to criticism, but I trust you won't jump into the story and neuter them. Let the chips fall where they may, that is what I have always believed in.
Nice update to the website! Six badges is a lot! Question: how do you get the "I'm so awesome" badge? :)
I read and favorite all your stories from your first post onsrteetpimp. Thanks for the entertainment!
Time to get paid and go home, kiddies!
Thanks Fableblossom, I really appreciate your kind words.
Thanks for the story and thanks to the mods for working to keep it on the front page so long.
Moving back and forth is life and death, as the blur of movement that you are, the rifle ball just clip your hip and continues on to slam into the stable corner where it finishes the job your dart started. A cavalry sword lying nearby is dropped by a raider as he clutches a bloody hand and looks on in horror at his two dead buddies.
It's going to be one of those days...
Today is a day of clutch collectiong and acquisitions. As a group of six heavily armed riders thunder down the trail leading into Three Roses territory, orders ring out about searching the bodies and taking any goods of value found there.
The last rays of the setting sun leave your party in a dusty pink glow as you enter the Canyon district. Flatland certainly doesn't have anything like this shithole, with it's high rocky walls surrounding dozens of little house entrances and a wide variety of people coming and going.
Still slice through flesh easily.
You noticing the color of the pipe in your hand brings you back to the business at hand.
Once again you have put your ruthless disposition and cold calculated approach toward your profession, and once again you have benefited from it. As you make your way through the streets of Canyon you count your take for the night. Your blade-like jagged knife has acquired and extra edge from being used to cut the throat of a merchant who tried to resist being relieved of his wallet.
Although it's basically rubbing alcohol with a hint of antiseptic, the Dancer's perfume bottles still sell for a pretty coin to the right people. Just Jake got off two perfect shots with his pistol and you palmed three gold rings off of two smugglers as you were leaving their bodies in an alley.
That' divides the take six ways, more than enough profit to spend luxuriously for awhile or save toward building up the bar.
It is time for some more excitement out there in the world, so hang around here and it will be more of the same thing, forever.
Will you stay in the bar...
Or return to adventuring?
Getting faster and faster heart palpitations and blood pressure just from thinking about it, hope when the moment comes, you get over it and jump like a sonofabitch. Lechery and the worldly desires all lead to pain and death anyway, might as well take some pleasures in this life before considering the next right?
Eating pepperoni pizza while watching tv on your day off from working is one thing. Basically, you have a stretching routine that involves sinews and muscles but not a lot of heavy stretching to cause micro tears while allowing the most amount of health benefit for each exercise.
Suddenly the opening theme cutscene to Zombie Massacre comes on your little 13" tv and you mouth the words along with the narrator.
Thinking about everyday things during your 10 minute shower, you begin to lather the shampoo into your scalp and froth it into a lather.
30 minutes before going on shift, you lie down on the bed with a bag of organic chips and hold up your polotics magazine with 2d cardboard glasses and read an article about the upcoming elections while trying to ignore what you've become.
Painfully biting into burnt popcorn chicken skin that has cooled but is somehow still too hot for comfort, there is a long pause in the tv.
Easily accesible from grocery stores and gas stations, junk food has practically been optimized to deliver maximum pleasure for minimum effort and money.
Every time you get your blood drawn as part of a medical screening, the phlebotomist always says in a chipper voice something along the lines of "Now I KNOW that hurt", followed by her tone becoming more deadpan as she looks at the blood that just got on the tube, "But you can take comfort in knowing you're helping science"
Creative writing classes usually start off with writing poems or other untimed writing to get you in the mood of what it's like to write. Then, in other classes you have time constraints where you are forced to edit and improve something, but this is just freestyle imaginative writing that has no limits and no rules and no laws and just see what comes out.
Tyrant looks as if he does not believe what just transpired between the two of you by the book and code of honor that you all went by. The ridiculous reality that you just won this fight amazes him as much as it does you. Yet, there you are, walking back along with your saviors from certain death.
You are tired of this dead end job and just going through routines and motions to get by. Stuck in a rut as the saying goes and just going through this life like a zombie, forever searching for better pastures but never finding anything.
Slowly the gnawing hunger fades and your mind feels clearer as your senses come back. The roars and noises of other people trapped in their broken shells cuts out immediately and everything becomes very quiet.
Now you will pay by being fired from your job at the local gas station after beating up a customer, but in that brief moment the choice was certainly worth it.
The world stops moving forward and everything comes to a grinding halt. At least one of you has decided not to just accept this horrible hand that fate has dealt and that you will NOT go quietly...
Stopping for a moment to tilt your head left and right to pop your neck, you continue "strutting"
Watching televsion all day and living off of the government is not a life. It is barely being alive. Every day my only meaningful relationship is with my tomato plants on my fire escape that I have to water every day. My dreams are plagued by the memories of my dead wife and the times when everything in life made sense. Everyday I watch as young people like yourself go walking down the street, laughing and enjoying everything. Everything in my life has become humdrum, like a machine running on autopilot.
Tyrant will not be so happy when we go to his jungle.
He will finally see that he has been living a half life as well. First I will take away everything from him. Then he will meekly try to beg for mercy. Then I will take away his life.
You have ceased your endless journey through life and have decided that now is the time to break free of your chains and live. So far things are going quite well. These new creatures you've met certainly seem like a friendly sort.
Easy enough
Sneaking in before day shift arrives to unlock the building and seeing who is in which cell is easy enough. There are only five guards including Tyrant and they all seem like the type that drink a lot on their lunch break. Your powers will be more than a match for any of them.
One even has a set schedule where he walks to a local deli every day at noon, buys a ham sandwich, then walks along some small local parks before returning.
You won't leave your body lying around for Tyrant to see of course, but instead project it out of your cell and traveling upward. After walking a mile or two you reach your destination and sneak in through an open window. No alarm has been raised and you have an entire day to scout the lay out of the building including where the security room is located as well as where the backup power supply is kept.
Easily accesible from grocery stores and gas stations
You have to go feed.

You brawling with a monster and losing.
Hunting down a monster in the swamps of the okeenokee is a desperate man's task. 
There are a host of normal natural dangers, 
and very real snares of many an expeditionary company, 
which prowls these swamps with musket and cutlass, 
always seeking to nab the monstrous beasts that lie under the surface of Okeenokee. 
Though the largest concentrations lie beneath the waters of this swamp, 
there are also half-human amphibious creatures above the water as well.
Scrounging for a weapon to attack the monster with, 
you realize you have no fire arms. 
A musket would be nice right about now. 
You wonder if you can skewer it before it catches you. 
You consider the material of which the boat you are in is made of. 
It isn't a strong craft meant to terrorize the water, 
but it's enough to hold weight, 
perhaps it can act as a protective shield from the creature as you push it forward.
lucky enough to have an ARROW left.
Posing with the defeated monster at your feat, 
you look around to make sure clhat you are correct about your surroundings. 
You are starting to get a feeling of sureness about the fact that you have been here before by the familiarity otit. 
It is almost 6 in the morning so you decide to follow the bank until you come across a familiar trail.
A little more than an hour later, 
you find Rose Creek Camp Ground just where you remembered it.
Chasing down a wounded monster and surviving an attack in the process is quite a thrill even though you have experienced death before.
Dancing out of the pathway of a powerful monster tail, 
you strike it clean in the eye when it makes a lunge at you.
You face the monster again and kill it from whence it came.
Seems like you're getting good at this video game training after all.
Screaming from the ripping of your flesh from the monster teeth makes you lose yourself 
in the thick fog of searing pain throughout your entire body. 
The worst thing still, is the thought that this could all happen again 
as you may have to enter this world many more times in preparation for the real thing. 
Just as your body starts to fill with unbearable anguish, 
and darkness creeps in on your sight, 
The Camerado from before comes out of his tent at Rose Creek Camp Ground 
and aids you quickly to his place of residence.
Challenging a monster with such little experience 
for the first time is rather reckless. 
You didn't even know if you could die in here, 
but luckily a creature won't live long enough to tell tales if it succeeds in a killing blow.
Perhaps YOU won't live to tell and complete your mission if luck isn't by your side during these trials.
Avoiding the sharp bite of a monster is still preferable to standing and fighting in your line of thinking, 
and you wonder whether the horrors of war have melted away your common sense.
You dwell on these thoughts as you lie down to take a short rest from the night's activities, 
thinking this experience is far from over.
Creating space between you and the monster
Expecting the beast to run away if you can muster a solid hit, you find the beast is relentless. It doesn't show signs of recoil and continues approaching to strike.
You run a circle around the creature in an attempt to keep distance and prevent it from getting a direct hit. It darts its head trying to catch a bite until its finally lunging forward with its prey in its mouth.
The creature shakes its head wildly and deposits you on the ground in a loud thud.
Hearing the crashing of a giant monster through the cypress swamp, you struggle to get up and continue running.
Trying to roll and dodge another bite from the creature is all your body can muster as you slowly start getting blinded and losing a sense of direction in this green hell. You fumble around looking for something but unless you reach the waterway your chances are slim.
You wonder whether you could find something in the murky waters to kill it since its singular eye gives it poor vision.
Feeding the monster you right arm to keep from being eaten alive sounds lame compared to slaying it yourself.
Shadowing a monster that has not noticed your presence as of yet
Running away from the more powerful monster isn't wise but at least you won't be eaten alive. The beast couldn't even see you!
You hide behind the body of the other monster, hoping that the main course of what appears to be a lizard won't notice your scent. You must be willing to risk death if you are to survive.
Stalking a monster that has not noticed your presence as of yet
Running away from this creature sounds dangerous but at least you will live to fight another day. It couldn't even see you!
You hide in the bushes and wait until the giant lizard wizzes past you, fleeing the scene of its dinner date.
If only you could be so lucky...
You draw your dagger, keeping a distance of about 15 feet from the beast, cautiously approaching it as it feeds on its prey.
Facing amonster
Brawling with a monster and losing
Scrounging for a weapon to attack the monster, you approach closer and closer until you're within striking distance of the beast. It continues feeding on its prey with its head down.
Posing with the defeated monster at your feat, you attempt to drive your dagger into one of its soft body parts. But as soon as you raise your arm higher to get the appropriate force in the stab, you feel a sharp pain go through your skull before feeling a crushing pain through all of your bones.
The beast crunches you up like a taco shell and swallows you whole, licking its bloody chops waiting for its next meal to come around again.
Chasing down a wounded monster
Dancing out of the pathway of a powerful monster tail
ripping of your flesh from the monster teeth ripping your skin from the monster tal

Delete all progress
Challenging a monster that is much more powerful than you
Awakening a monster from its meal feels your warm blood filling the creature's belly with your flesh slowly regenerating as it lays you upon its back. You've shown no resistance to its powerful attacks and have only weakened the creature slightly with your unusually acidic blood.
Unsurprisingly, it feeds upon you for a fourth time before making sure you won't be trouble again.
Avoiding the sharp bite of a monster
Creating space between you and the monster that was targeting you for a late night snack with your incredible speed.
Losing your footing nearly exposes your location to the quick monster but one of your unsubstantial tendrils holds on to a tiny rock ledge.
stalking an american alligator
Stalking a monster
Facing a monster
stalking an american alligator
Stalking a monster
Facing a monster
run away, knowing that no weapon can succeed against this creature.
Nearby you find the body of the unfortunate paramedic that returned with Lucas to find his way to the underground city and its sole entrance located within an overgrown sinkhole filled with standing water. The paramedic's body is trapped beneath one of those large trees that have fallen and stuck upright in the marshy soil.
Stalking a monster
Brawling with a monster and losing to the beast
Lying there in the path of a monster that could care less that you had two good legs. As long as it has its next meal after a long dry spell, the monster just picks off anything that moves and right now, you look like an easy target.
Hunting down a monster in the swamps of the okeenokee.
Feeling your sharp teeth fill your mouth as the scent of human blood leads you towards back another similar beast's den.
A group of superhumans roughing up a couple around an overturned ambulance calls out to you as they catch sight of your bloody mouth. One of them mockingly claims that you must have gotten lost on your way back from the Central Park graveyard. They claim that Paranormal Preservation are wimps for refusing to hunt werewolves in their home territory.
Scrounging for a weapon to attack the monster
Chasing a monster that has your scent
crept up on the pair of werewolves gnawing on a human shank that they had recently lobbed between themselves. The shank belonged to an unlucky hiker that had wandered in this part of the woods at night. Hitting his head and breaking his flashlight when he tumbled down one of the many sinkhole of the area.
Posing with the defeated monster at your feat
Chasing down a wounded monster
Dancing out of the pathway of a powerful monster tail
Screaming from the ripping of your flesh from the monster teeth ripping your skin from the monster tal
Challenging a monster thatis much more powerful than you
Avoiding the sharp bite of a monster
Creating space between you and the monster that was targeting you for a late night snack with your incredible speed.
Raining down upon them with stones and other heavy objects to keep th e monsters at a distance so that they cannot bite you.
Talking to a monster about how much more superior you are in every way. Begging and pleading will only work on humans, not these cruel soulless beasts.
curves where the infected can easily follow.
Expecting the beast to run away if you can muster a solid hit, further into the marsh.
fighting only makes them angry and more dangerous
Lacking the sharp teeth and powerful jaws of a werewolf, you deftly avoid her snapping jaw and land a hard jab to her eye. She bounds away after your thrown backwards by the force of your blow but was enough to damage her vision in that eye.
Fighting a werewolf WITH human teeth and a human attitude. Mewling subhumans with a deathwish need not apply.
Hearing the crashing of a giant monster through the cypress
Feeding the monster you right arm with its teeth
being a nice tasty treat to the werewolf.
You spit, kick and stomp viciously out of the jaws but cannot escape entirely unscathed as you lose your foot to the bone crushing bite.
This is enough to scare other less hearty prey off but you press on regardless, You limp after it with one bare bloody foot and rain blows upon it with a jagged stone clutched in your hand.
Running away from the more powerful monster
Spinning out of range of the crushing tail of the monster
Getting your hands around the jaws of the monster and pressing down
Riding the back of the incredible monster as it thrashes about trying to throw you off
Clinging for dear life on as the monster attempts to claw you off with its hind feet
Putting your whole weight upon a rope attached to the monsters mouth and attempting to choke
Scrambling for cover
Learning all of the tricks of the monster's eyes
You lose to the superior experience and natural abilities of th e Werewolf.
Bioengineering poison to stop the creature
Eating the tail meat of the monster
Empowering your arms to grab hold of the monster
Whispering messages of defeat into the ears of the monster
Accidentally ripping off part of the monster's ear with your spike ring
Killing it with kindness
Blasting the mighty beast with a firestorm
Attempting to close the jaws of the monster
Piercing the armor of the monster
Leading it by the nose
Flitting out of reach of the blades and fangs
Attempting to time your breathing to outfox it.
Dissecting the creature and turning its own magic against it.
Freezing the movement of the monster
Removing the tooth of the monster
Getting the monster to expose its greatest weakness
Killing the Captain of a Balack Mercenaries Unit
Fearing the pain the monster could cause
Stalking a monster
Facing a monster with only a knife before retreating
The umbrella comes to life blown by the wind and smacks into the werewolf
Retreating from the fight
Waiting for the right opportunity before acting
Standing your ground and attempting to hold out until help arrives
Brawling with a monster and losing to the beast
Hunting down a monster in the swamps of the okeenokee and attempting to poison it's dinner
Hunt a monster through the swamps
Filling up your quiver from long range
Retreating back to town (You need more firepower)
Scrounging for a weapon to attack the monster
Unsheathing a vargnief to stab the creature in human form
Retreating back to town for a silver weapon (Only silver stops them)
Managing to wound it superficially before it destroys you.
Posing with the defeated monster at your feat
Posing with the victorious team before setting off to your next adventure!
The smell of Blood and the squelching sound of mud underfoot attracts a Werewolf to your location.
Chasing down a wounded monster
Dancing out of the pathway of a powerful monster tail
Screaming from the ripping of your flesh from the monster teeth
Running away from a powerful monster nose
Crawling out of the area of effect for a devastating sweeping clawed foot.
Having a silver weapon handy means there is a possible to kill it before the werewolf wins. Fighting back you bleed it and stab it, but it is hard to focus on the fight with burny agony of silver this close to your flesh.
Challenging a monster like this isn't going to end well is it? But you have to try something.
An arrow burns into your shoulder, another one lodges in your throat as the mercenaries finish you off. Death catches up with you quickly as you find yourself trying to make sense of how you survived the bestial transformation but still ended as just another victim of the beast.
Silver arrows caused your untimely death.
Avoiding the sharp bite of a monster